– LEGAL MAXIMUM AND CORPORATE LIABILITY 6.1 - Determining the Legal Maximum 112. As already outlined in the Guidelines WP253, the GDPR does not tag fixed sums to specific infringements. Instead, the GDPR provides for overall maximum amounts44 and thereby follows the general tradition of EU law on sanctions already established by other legal acts45. 113. The amounts in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR constitute the legal maximum and prohibit the supervisory authorities from imposing fines that in their outcome exceed the applicable maximum amounts. In order to determine the correct legal maximum, Article 83(3) GDPR needs to be taken into account46, where applicable (see Chapter 3.1.2). Each supervisory authority therefore has to ensure that these maximum amounts are not exceeded when calculating fines based on these Guidelines. Depending on the individual case, different maximum amounts may become relevant. 6.1.1 - Static maximum amounts 114. Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR provide for static amounts as a rule and differentiate between infringements of different categories of obligations under the GDPR. As explained above, Article 83(4) GDPR allows for fines up to €10 million for infringing the obligations outlined therein, while Article 83(5) and (6) GDPR allow for fines up to €20 million for infringing the obligations outlined in them. 6.1.2 - Dynamic maximum amounts 115. In case of an undertaking 47, the fining range may shift towards a higher turnover-based48 maximum amount. This turnover-based maximum amount is dynamic and individualised towards the respective undertaking in order to achieve the principles of effectiveness, proportionality and deterrence. 116. More specifically, Article 83(4) GDPR allows for a maximum amount of 2% and Article 83(5) and (6) for a maximum amount of 4% of the undertaking’s total annual turnover of the previous financial year. The wording of the GDPR requires consideration of the static maximum amount or the dynamic turnover-based maximum amount, “whichever is higher”. Consequently, these turnover-based maximum amounts only apply if they exceed the static maximum in the individual case. That is the case when the undertaking’s total annual turnover of the previous financial year amounts to more than €500 million.49. 44 Recital 150 GDPR, second sentence: “This Regulation should indicate infringements and the upper limit and criteria for setting the related administrative fines, which should be determined by the competent supervisory authority in each individual case, taking into account all relevant circumstances of the specific situation, with due regard in particular to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement and of its consequences and the measures taken to ensure compliance with the obligations under this Regulation and to prevent or mitigate the consequences of the infringement.” 45 In particular, Article 23(2) of Regulation (EC) No. 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty. 46 Please see also EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 326. 47 As for the term “undertaking”, please note Chapter 6.2.1 of these Guidelines. 48 As for the term “turnover”, please note Chapter 6.2.2 of these Guidelines. 49 2% of 500 million amounts to 10 million (the static maximum amount envisaged in Article 83(4) GDPR) and 4% of 500 million amounts to 20 million (the static maximum amount envisaged in Article 83(5) GDPR). --- PAGE 35 --- Adopted Example 8a – Dynamic maximum A credit reporting agency (CRA) collects and sells all creditworthiness data of all EU citizens to advertising and retailing companies without a legal basis. The CRA’s annual worldwide turnover of the preceding year amounts to €3 billion. Here, the CRA infringed inter alia Article 6, which can be punished with a fine pursuant to Article 83(5) GDPR. The static maximum would amount to €20 million. The dynamic maximum would amount to €120 million (4% of €3 billion). The fine can amount up to €120 million as this dynamic maximum is higher than the static maximum of €20 million. As a consequence, the fine is allowed to exceed the static maximum of €20 million, but must not exceed the applicable legal maximum of €120 million. Example 8b – Static maximum A retailer of sunglasses operates an online shop, which allows customers to place their orders. By way of the order form the retailer processes also personal data, including bank account details. The retailer fails to provide for a proper https transport encryption so that third parties are potentially able to intercept the personal data during the transaction. The retailer infringes Article 32(1) GDPR and can be fined pursuant to Article 83(4) GDPR. The retailer’s annual worldwide turnover of the preceding year amounts to €450 million. In this case the static maximum of €10 million is higher than the dynamic maximum of €9 million (=2% of €450 million), so that the maximum of €10 million takes precedence. Therefore, the fine must not exceed the legal maximum of €10 million. Example 8c – Controllers and processors that are not an undertaking A municipality has an online system that allows its citizens to register for appointments, such as to apply for a passport or a marriage license. The municipality is the sole controller for this online system. Unfortunately, it is found that the system also transmits on a permanent basis the collected data to external servers of a processor in an inadequate third country, where they are stored. No adequate safeguards are put in place with regard to the third country transfer. Except for the transfer, the data are collected and processed on the basis of valid consent. The municipality infringed Article 44 GDPR by transferring special categories of personal data into an inadequate third country without appropriate safeguards. Therefore, it can be fined pursuant to Article 83(5). As the municipality does not meet the definition of an undertaking the static legal maximum applies, so that the fine must not exceed €20 million. However, this is only the case if the Member State in which this municipality is located has not laid down specific rules on whether and to what extent administrative fines may be imposed on public authorities and bodies established in that Member State (Article 83(7) GDPR). 6.2 - Determining the undertaking’s turnover and corporate liability 117. In order to determine the correct turnover for the dynamic legal maximum, it is important to understand the concepts of undertaking and turnover as used in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR. In this regard, utmost consideration must be given to the recitals of the GDPR, provided by the European legislator for guidance on GDPR interpretation. 6.2.1 - Determining an undertaking and corporate liability 118. As for the term “undertaking”, the European legislator provides explicit further clarification. Recital 150 GDPR states: “Where administrative fines are imposed on an undertaking, an undertaking should be understood to be an undertaking in accordance with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU for those purposes.” --- PAGE 36 --- Adopted 119. Therefore, Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR in light of recital 150 relies on the concept of undertaking in accordance with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, 50 without prejudice to Article 4(18) GDPR (which gives a definition of an enterprise) and Article 4(19) GDPR (which defines a group of undertakings). The former concept is mainly used in Chapter V GDPR, in the phrase group of enterprises engaged in a joint economic activity. Besides that, the term is applied in a general sense, not as the addressee of a provision or obligation. 120. Accordingly, in cases where the controller or processor is (part of) an undertaking in the sense of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, the combined turnover of such undertaking as a whole can be used to determine the dynamic upper limit of the fine (see Chapter 6.2.2), and to ensure that the resulting fine is in line with the principles of effectiveness, proportionality and dissuasiveness (Article 83(1) GDPR)51. 121. The CJEU has developed a vast body of case law on the concept of undertaking. The term “undertaking”, “encompasses every entity engaged in an economic activity, regardless of the legal status of the entity and the way in which it is financed.”52 For the purpose of competition law, "undertakings” are therefore identified with economic units rather than legal units. Different companies belonging to the same group can form an economic unit and therefore an undertaking within the meaning of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU53. 122. In line with settled CJEU case law, the term undertaking in Articles 101 and 102 TFEU can refer to a single economic unit (SEU), even if that economic unit consists of several natural or legal persons. Whether several entities form a SEU depends largely on whether the individual entity is free in its decision-making ability or whether a leading entity, namely the parent company, exercises decisive influence over the others. 54 The criteria for determining this are based on the economic, legal and organisational links between the parent company and its subsidiary, for example, the amount of the participation, personnel or organisational ties, instructions and the existence of company contracts55. 123. In line with the SEU doctrine, Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR follow the principle of direct corporate