the case, including e.g. the accumulation of multiple infringements, increases and decreases for aggravating and mitigating circumstances and financial/socio-economic circumstances. It is, however, incumbent upon the supervisory authority to ensure that the same circumstances are not counted twice. In particular, supervisory authorities should not, under Chapter 7, repeat the increases or decreases relative to the turnover of the company, but rather revisit their evaluation of the appropriate starting amount. 65. For the reasons outlined above, the supervisory authority may consider adjusting the starting amount corresponding to the seriousness of the infringement in cases where this infringement is committed by an undertaking with an annual turnover not exceeding 2 million euros, an annual turnover not exceeding 10 million euros, or an annual turnover not exceeding 50 million euros30. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of ≤ €2m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 0.2% and 0.4% of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €2m up until €10m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 0.3% and 2% of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €10m up until €50m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 1.5% and 10% of the identified starting amount. 66. For the same reasons, the supervisory authority may consider adjusting the starting amount corresponding to the seriousness of the infringement in cases where this infringement is committed by an undertaking with an annual turnover not exceeding 100 million euros, an annual turnover not exceeding 250 million euros and an annual turnover not exceeding 500 million euros31. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €50m up until €100m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 8% and 20% of the identified starting amount. 28 See also EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraphs 411 and 412: “[Insofar] the turnover of an undertaking is not exclusively relevant for the determination of the maximum fine amount in accordance with Article 83(4)-(6) GDPR, but it may also be considered [as one relevant element among others] for the calculation of the fine itself, where appropriate, to ensure the fine is effective, proportionate and dissuasive in accordance with Article 83(1) GDPR.” The turnover of the undertaking concerned is further elaborated on in Chapter 6.2 of these Guidelines. 29 This has been stated by the General Court in case T-25/06, Alliance One International, Inc. v European Commission, paragraph 211, referencing other case law for instance case T-9/99, HFB and Others v Commission, paragraphs 528 and 529 and case T-175/05, Akzo Nobel and Others v Commission, paragraph 114. 30 These turnover figures are inspired by the Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. In determining the starting points, the EDPB relies on the annual turnover of the undertaking alone (see Chapter 6 below). 31 These figures are added to bridge the gap between the highest threshold of the previous paragraph and the turnover threshold identified in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €100m up until €250m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 15% and 50 % of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €250m up until €500m,, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 40% and 100% of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover above €500m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed without an adjustment of the identified starting amount. Indeed, such undertakings will exceed the static legal maximum and, thus, the size of the undertaking is already reflected in the dynamic legal maximum used to determine the starting amount for further calculation based on the evaluation of the seriousness of the infringement. 67. As a general rule, the higher the turnover of the undertaking within its applicable tier, the higher the starting amount is likely to be. The latter holds particularly true for the largest of undertakings, for which the category of starting amounts has the widest range. 68. Moreover, the supervisory authority is under no obligation to apply this adjustment if it is not necessary from the point of view of effectiveness, dissuasiveness and proportionality to adjust the starting amount of the fine. 69. It should be reiterated that these figures are the starting points for further calculation, and not fixed amounts (price tags) for infringements of provisions of the GDPR. The supervisory authority has the discretion to utilise the full fining range from any amount until the legal maximum, ensuring that the fine is tailored to the circumstances of the case, as the Court of Justice requires in case an abstract starting point is used. Example 6a – Identifying the starting points for further calculation A supermarket chain with a turnover of €450 million has infringed Article 12 GDPR. The supervisory authority, based on a careful analysis of the circumstances of the case, decided that the infringement is of a low level of seriousness. To determine the starting point for further calculation, the supervisory authority first identifies that Article 12 GDPR is listed in Article 83(5)(b) GDPR and that, based on the turnover of the undertaking (€450 million), a legal maximum of €20 million ,- applies. Based on the level of seriousness determined by the supervisory authority (low), a starting amount between €0 and €2 million,- should be considered (between 0 and 10% of the applicable legal maximum, see paragraph 60 above). The supervisory authority considers that an adjustment down to 90% of the starting amount is justified based on the size of the undertaking, which has a turnover of €450 million. This amount forms the basis for further calculation, which should result in a final amount not exceeding the applicable legal maximum of €20 million. Example 6b – Identifying the starting points for further calculation A start-up dating app with a turnover of €500,000,- is discovered to have sold sensitive personal data of its customers to several data brokers for analytics and thereby infringed Articles 9 and 5(1)(a) GDPR. The supervisory authority, based on a careful analysis of the circumstances of the case, --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted decided that the infringement is of a high level of seriousness. To determine the starting point for further calculation, the supervisory authority first identifies that Articles 9 and 5 GDPR are listed in Article 83(5)(a) GDPR and that, based on the turnover of the undertaking (€500,000,-), a legal maximum of €20,000,000,- applies. Based on the level of seriousness determined by the supervisory authority (high), a starting amount between €4,000,000,- and €20,000,000,- should be considered (between 20 and 100% of the applicable legal maximum, see paragraph 60 above). The supervisory authority considers that an adjustment down to 0.25 % of the starting amount is justified based on the size of the undertaking, which has a turnover of €500,000. This amount forms the basis for further calculation, which should result in a final amount not exceeding the applicable maximum of €20 million. CHAPTER 5 – AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES 5.1 - Identification of aggravating and mitigating factors 70. Following the structure of the GDPR, after having evaluated the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement as well as its intentional or negligent character of the infringement and the categories of personal data affected, the supervisory authority must take account of the remaining aggravating and mitigating factors as listed in Article 83(2) GDPR. 71. With regard to the assessment of these elements, increases or decreases of a fine cannot be predetermined through tables or percentages. It is reiterated that the actual quantification of the fine will depend on all the elements collected during the course of the investigation and on further considerations also linked to previous fining experiences of the supervisory authority. 72. For clarity, it should be noted that each criterion of Article 83(2) GDPR – whether it is assessed under Chapter 4 or this Chapter – should only be taken into account once as part of the overall assessment of Article 83(2) GDPR. 5.2 - Actions taken by controller or processor to mitigate damage suffered by data subjects 73. A first step in determining whether aggravating or mitigating circumstances have occurred, is to review Articles 83(2)(c), which concerns “any action taken by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects.” 74. As recalled in Guidelines WP253, data controllers and processors are already obliged to “implement technical and organisational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk, to carry out data protection impact assessments and mitigate risks arising from the processing of personal data to the rights and freedoms of the individuals.” However, in case of an infringement, the controller or processor should “do whatever they can do in order to reduce the