upheld according to the wording and the spirit of the GDPR. 3. Therefore, the EDPB developed guidance to provide a clear and transparent basis for the supervisory authorities’ setting of fines. The previously published Guidelines on the application and setting of administrative fines address the circumstances in which an administrative fine would be an appropriate tool and interpret the criteria of Article 83 GDPR in this respect 2 . The present Guidelines address the methodology for the calculation of administrative fines. The two sets of Guidelines are applicable simultaneously and should be seen as complementary. 1 References to “Member States” made throughout this document should be understood as references to “EEA Member States”. 2 Guidelines on the application and setting of administrative fines for the purpose of the Regulation 2016/679, WP 253 (hereinafter referred to as “Guidelines WP 253”). Guidelines WP 253 were endorsed by the EDPB in its first Plenary meeting, on 25 May 2018. See Endorsement 1/2018, available online here. --- PAGE 7 --- Adopted 1.2 - Objective 4. These Guidelines are intended for use by the supervisory authorities to ensure a consistent application and enforcement of the GDPR and express the EDPB’s common understanding of the provisions of Article 83 GDPR. 5. The aim of these Guidelines is to create harmonised starting points as a common orientation, on the basis of which the calculation of administrative fines in individual cases can take place. However, it is settled case law that any such guidance need not be as specific as to allow a controller or processor to make a precise mathematical calculation of the expected fine3. It is emphasised throughout these Guidelines that the final amount of the fine depends on all the circumstances of the case. The EDPB therefore envisages harmonisation on the starting points and methodology used to calculate a fine, rather than harmonisation on the outcome. 6. These Guidelines can be seen as following a step-by-step approach, though supervisory authorities are not obliged to follow all steps if they are not applicable in a given case, nor to provide reasoning surrounding aspects of the Guidelines that are not applicable. Although, reasoning should at least include the factors which led to determining the level of seriousness, the turnover which is applied, and the aggravating and mitigating factors that were applied. 7. Notwithstanding these Guidelines, supervisory authorities remain subject to all procedural obligations under national and EU law, including the duty to state reasons for their decisions and their obligations under the one stop shop mechanism. In that light, although the supervisory authorities are required to provide sufficient reasoning for their findings in accordance with national and EU law, these guidelines should not be interpreted as requiring the supervisory authority to state the exact starting amount or quantify the precise impact of each aggravating or mitigating circumstance. Moreover, mere reference to these Guidelines cannot replace the reasoning to be provided in a specific case. 8. The Guidelines will be reviewed on an ongoing basis, as practices in the EU and the EEA are developed. It should be noted that, with the exception of Denmark and Estonia4, supervisory authorities are authorised to issue administrative fines, which are binding if not appealed. Thus, over time, both administrative and judicial practice will further develop. 1.3 - Scope 9. These Guidelines are intended to govern and lay the foundation of the supervisory authorities’ setting of fines on an overarching level. The guidance set out applies to all types of controllers and processors according to Article 4(7) and (8) GDPR except natural persons when they do not act as undertakings. This is not withstanding the powers of national authorities to fine natural persons. 10. According to Article 83(7) GDPR, each Member State may lay down the rules on whether and to what extent administrative fines may be imposed on public authorities and bodies established in that Member State. Provided that supervisory authorities have this power on the basis of national law, these Guidelines apply to the calculation of the fine to be imposed on public authorities and bodies, with the exception of Chapter 4.3. Supervisory authorities remain free, however, to apply a methodology similar to the one described in this Chapter. In addition, Chapter 6 is not applicable to the calculation of the fine to be imposed on public 3 See, for example, Case C-189/02 P, C-202/02 P, C-205/02 P to C-208/02 P and C-213/02 P, Dansk Rørindustri A/S and others v. Commission, paragraph 172 and Case T-91/11, InnoLux Corp. v. Commission, paragraph 88. 4 See Recital 151 GDPR. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted authorities and bodies, in case national law provides for different legal maximums and the public authority or body does not act as an undertaking as defined in Chapter 6.2.1. 11. The Guidelines cover cross border cases as well as non-cross border cases. 12. The Guidelines are not exhaustive, neither will they provide explanations about the differences between national administrative, civil or criminal law systems when imposing administrative sanctions in general. 1.4 - Applicability 13. According to Article 70(1)(e) GDPR, the EDPB is empowered to issue guidelines, recommendations and best practices in order to encourage consistent application of the GDPR. Article 70(1)(k) GDPR specifies that the Board shall ensure the consistent application of the GDPR and shall, on its own initiative or, where relevant, at the request of the European Commission, in particular, draw up guidelines for supervisory authorities concerning the application of measures referred to in Article 58 and the setting of administrative fines pursuant to Article 83. 14. In order to achieve a consistent approach to the imposition of administrative fines that adequately reflects all of the principles in the GDPR, the EDPB has agreed on a common understanding of the assessment criteria in Article 83 GDPR. The individual supervisory authorities will reflect this common approach, in accordance with the local administrative and judicial laws applicable to them. CHAPTER 2 – METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING THE AMOUNT OF THE FINE 2.1 - General considerations 15. Notwithstanding cooperation and consistency duties, the calculation of the amount of the fine is at the discretion of the supervisory authority. The GDPR requires that the amount of the fine shall in each individual case be effective, proportionate and dissuasive (Article 83(1) GDPR). Moreover, when setting the amount of the fine, supervisory authorities shall give due regard to a list of circumstances that refer to features of the infringement (its seriousness) or of the character of the perpetrator (Article 83(2) GDPR). The quantification of the amount of the fine is therefore based on a specific evaluation carried out in each case, taking account of the parameters included in the GDPR. 16. For conduct infringing data protection rules, the GDPR does not provide for a minimum fine. Rather, the GDPR only provides for maximum amounts in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR, in which several different types of conduct are grouped together. A fine can ultimately only be calculated by weighing up all the factors expressly identified in Article 83(2)(a)–(j) GDPR, relevant to the case and any other relevant elements, even if not explicitly listed in the said provisions (as Article 83(2)(k) GDPR requires to give due regard to any other applicable factor). Finally, the final amount of the fine resulting from this assessment must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive in each individual case (Article 83(1) GDPR). Any fine imposed must sufficiently take into account all of these parameters, whilst at the same time not exceeding the legal maximum provided for in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR. --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted 2.2 - Overview of the methodology 17. Taking into account these parameters, the EDPB has devised the following methodology for calculating administrative fines for infringements of the GDPR. Step 1 Identifying the processing operations in the case and evaluating the application of Article 83(3) GDPR. (Chapter 3) Step 2 Finding the starting point for further calculation based on an evaluation of (Chapter 4) a) the classification in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR; b) the seriousness of the infringement pursuant to Article 83(2)(a), (b) and (g) GDPR; c) the turnover of the undertaking as one relevant element to take into consideration with a view to imposing an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine, pursuant to Article 83(1) GDPR. Step 3 Evaluating aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to past or present behaviour of the controller/processor and increasing or decreasing the fine accordingly. (Chapter 5) Step 4 Identifying the relevant legal maximums for the different processing operations. Increases applied in previous or next steps cannot exceed this amount. (Chapter 6) Step 5 Analysing whether the final amount of the calculated fine meets the requirements of effectiveness, dissuasiveness and proportionality, as required by Article 83(1) GDPR, and increasing or decreasing the fine accordingly. (Chapter 7) 2.3 - Infringements with fixed amounts 18. In certain circumstances, the supervisory authority may consider that certain infringements can be punished with a fine of a predetermined, fixed amount. The application of a fixed amount to certain types of infringements cannot hamper the application of the GDPR, in particular,