which the previous infringement was established – particularly of any measures taken by the supervisory authority or by the judicial authority – in accordance with national law. --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted 93. Previous infringements could also be considered when they were found by a different supervisory authority concerning the same controller/processor. For example, the lead supervisory authority dealing with an infringement through the cooperation (one-stop-shop) mechanism in accordance with Article 60 GDPR could take into account infringements previously determined in local cases, by another supervisory authority, concerning the same controller/processor. Likewise, infringements previously determined by the lead supervisory authority could be taken into account when a different authority must handle a complaint lodged with it in cases with only local impacts under Article 56(2) GDPR. Where there is no lead supervisory authority (for example, in case the controller or processor is not established in the European Union), supervisory authorities could also take into account infringements previously determined by another supervisory authority concerning the same controller/processor. 94. The existence of previous infringements can be considered an aggravating factor in the calculation of the fine. The weight given to this factor is to be determined in view of the nature and frequency of the previous infringements. The absence of any previous infringements, however, cannot be considered a mitigating factor, as compliance with the GDPR is the norm. If there are no previous infringements, this factor can be regarded as neutral. 5.5 - Degree of cooperation with the supervisory authority in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effects of the infringement 95. Article 83(2)(f) requires the supervisory authority to take account of the degree of the controller’s or processor’s cooperation with the supervisory authority in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effects of the infringement. 96. Before further assessing the level of cooperation the controller or processor has established with the supervisory authority, it must be reiterated that a general obligation to cooperate is incumbent on the controller and the processor pursuant to Article 31 GDPR, and that lack of cooperation may lead to the application of the fine provided for in Article 83(4)(a) GDPR. It should therefore be considered that the ordinary duty of cooperation is mandatory and should therefore be considered neutral (and not a mitigating factor). 97. However, where cooperation with the supervisory authority has had the effect of limiting or avoiding negative consequences for the rights of the individuals that might otherwise have occurred, the supervisory authority may consider this a mitigating factor in the sense of Article 83(2)(f) GDPR, thereby decreasing the amount of the fine. This may for instance be the case when a controller or processor “has responded in a particular manner to the supervisory authority’s requests during the investigation phase in that specific case which has significantly limited the impact on individuals’ rights as a result”36. 5.6 - The manner in which the infringement became known to the supervisory authority 98. Following Article 83(2)(h), the manner in which the infringement became known to the supervisory authority could be a relevant aggravating or mitigating factor. In assessing this, particular weight can be given to the question whether, and if so to what extent, the controller or processor notified the infringement out of its 36 Guidelines WP253, p. 14. --- PAGE 30 --- Adopted own motion, before the infringement was known to the supervisory authority by – for instance – a complaint or an investigation. This circumstance is not relevant when the controller is subject to specific notification obligations (such as in the case of personal data breaches according to Article 33)37. In such cases, this notification should be considered as neutral38. 99. Where the infringement became known to the supervisory authority by, for instance, a complaint or an investigation, this element should also, as a rule, be considered as neutral. The supervisory authority may consider this a mitigating circumstance if the controller or processor notified the infringement out of its own motion, prior to the supervisory authority’s knowledge of the case. 5.7 - Compliance with measures previously ordered with regard to the same subject matter 100. Article 83(2)(i) GDPR states that “where measures referred to in Article 58(2) have previously been ordered against the controller or processor concerned with regard to the same subject-matter, compliance with those measures” must be considered when deciding whether to impose an administrative fine and deciding on its amount. 101. As opposed to Article 83(2)(e) GDPR, this assessment only refers to measures that supervisory authorities themselves have previously issued to the same controller or processor with regard to the same subject matter39. 102. In this respect, the controller or processor might hold reasonable expectations that compliance with measures previously issued against them would prevent a same subject-matter infringement from taking place in the future. However, since compliance with measures previously ordered is mandatory for the data controller or processor, it should not be taken into account as a mitigating factor per se. On the contrary, a reinforced commitment on the part of the controller or processor in the fulfilment of previous measures is required for this factor to apply as mitigating, e.g. taking additional measures beyond those ordered by the supervisory authority. 103. Conversely, non-compliance with a corrective power previously ordered may be considered either as an aggravating factor, or as a different infringement in itself, pursuant to Article 83(5)(e) and Article 83(6) GDPR. Therefore, due note should be taken that the same non-compliant behaviour cannot lead to a situation where it is punished twice. 5.8 - Adherence to approved codes of conduct or approved certification mechanisms 104. Article 83(2)(j) GDPR states that adherence to codes of conduct pursuant to Article 40 GDPR or approved certification mechanisms pursuant to Article 42 GDPR may be a relevant factor. 105. As recalled by Guidelines WP253, adherence to codes of conduct pursuant to Article 40 GDPR or approved certification mechanisms pursuant to Article 42 GDPR may in some circumstances constitute a mitigating factor. Approved codes of conduct will, according to Article 40(4) GDPR, contain “mechanisms which enable the (monitoring) body to carry out mandatory monitoring of compliance with its provisions.” Certain forms of sanctioning non-compliant behaviour may be made through the monitoring scheme, according to Article 37 It should be underlined that a personal data breach does not necessarily imply a GDPR infringement. 38 This is underlined by Guidelines WP 253, p. 15. 39 Ibid. --- PAGE 31 --- Adopted 41(4) GDPR, including suspension or exclusion of the controller or processor concerned from the code community. Although the supervisory authority can take into account previously imposed sanctions pertaining to the self-regulatory scheme, the powers of the monitoring body are pursuant to Article 41(4) GDPR “without prejudice to the tasks and powers of the competent supervisory authority”, which means that the supervisory authority is not under an obligation to take into account any sanctions by the monitoring body40. 106. On the other hand, if failure to comply with the codes of conduct or certification is directly relevant to the infringement, the supervisory authority may consider this an aggravating circumstance. 5.9 - Other aggravating and mitigating circumstances 107. Article 83(2)(k) GDPR gives the supervisory authority room to take into account any other aggravating or mitigating factors applicable to the circumstances of the case. In the individual case there may be many elements involved, which cannot all be codified or listed and which will have to be taken into account in order to ensure that the sanction applied is effective, proportionate and dissuasive in each individual case. 108. Article 83(2)(k) GDPR mentions examples of “any other aggravating or mitigating factor applicable to the circumstances of the case,” i.e. financial benefits gained, or losses avoided, directly or indirectly, from the infringement. It is considered that this provision is of fundamental importance for adjusting the amount of the fine to the specific case. In this sense, it is considered that it should be interpreted as an instance of the principle of fairness and justice applied to the individual case. 109. The scope of this provision, which is necessarily open-ended, should include all the reasoned considerations regarding the socio-economic context in which the controller or processor operates, those relating to the legal context and those concerning the market context41. 110. In particular, economic gain from the infringement could be an aggravating circumstance if the case provides information about profit obtained as a result of the infringement of the GDPR. 111. Exceptional circumstances that can lead to significant changes in the socio-economic context (e.g. the onset of a serious pandemic emergency that could radically change the way processing of personal data is carried out) could also be considered under Article 83(2)(k) GDPR. NB: The examples in this Chapter are illustrations of the effect that aggravating and mitigating circumstances may have on the amount of the fine. The increases or decreases mentioned in these imaginary cases cannot be considered precedents or indications of percentages to be used in real life cases. Example 7a