of 14 million people), while the level of damage suffered by them was considered moderate (non-material damage, in the form of nuisance). The latter assessment was made taking into account the categories of data affected (name and phone number). The seriousness of the infringement was increased, however, by the fact that the infringement was committed in contrary to an advice from the data protection officer and, thus, considered intentional. Taking all the above into account (serious nature, long duration, high number of data subjects, nationwide scope, intentional nature, vis-à-vis moderate damage), the supervisory concludes that the infringement is considered to be at a high level of seriousness. The supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 20 and 100% of the legal maximum included in Article 83(5) GDPR. Example 5b – Qualifying the seriousness of an infringement (medium level of seriousness) A supervisory authority received a personal data breach notification from a hospital. From this notification, it appeared that several staff members had been able to view parts of patients’ health files that – based on their department – should not have been accessible to them. The hospital had been working on procedures to regulate access to patient files, and had implemented strict measures for restricted access. That entailed that staff from one department could only access medical information relevant to that specific department. In addition, the hospital had invested in privacy awareness amongst its staff members. However, as it turned out, there were issues concerning the monitoring of authorisations. Staff members that transferred between departments were still able to gain access to the patient files from their “old” departments and the hospital had no procedures in place to match the current position of the staff member with their authorisation. Internal investigation by the hospital showed that at least 150 staff members (out of the 3500) had inaccurate authorisations, affecting at least 20,000 of the 95,000 patient files. The hospital could show that in at least 16 instances staff members had used their authorisations to view patient files. The supervisory authority considers that there has been a breach of Article 32 GDPR. In assessing the seriousness of the case, the supervisory authority first noted that an infringement of Article 32 GDPR is listed among the infringements of Article 83(4) GDPR and therefore falls within the lower tier of Article 83 GDPR. Secondly, the supervisory authority assessed the circumstances of the case. In that regard, the supervisory authority considered that even though the number of data subjects affected by the breach was only 16, this could potentially have been 20,000 in the circumstances of the case and even 95,000 given the systemic nature of the issue. Furthermore, the supervisory authority categorised the infringement as negligent, but to a low degree, which was considered a neutral factor in the circumstances of this particular case due to the fact that the hospital failed to adopt authorisation policies where it surely should have done so but had, otherwise, taken steps to implement strict measures to restrict access. This evaluation was not impacted by the fact that other data protection and security policies were implemented successfully, as the GDPR requires. Lastly, the supervisory authority attributed significant weight to the fact that the patient files include health data, which are special categories of data according to Article 9 GDPR. --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted Taking all the above into account (nature of the processing and special categories of data vis-à-vis the number of data subjects actually and potentially affected, the supervisory authority concludes that the infringement is considered to be at a medium level of seriousness. The supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 10 and 20% of the legal maximum included in Article 83(4) GDPR. Example 5c – Qualifying the seriousness of an infringement (low level of seriousness) A supervisory authority has received numerous complaints about the way in which an online store handles the right of access of its data subjects. According to the complainants, the handling of their access requests has taken between 4 and 6 months, which is outside the timeframe permitted by the GDPR. The supervisory authority investigates the complaints and finds that the online store responds to access requests a maximum of three months too late in 5% of the cases. In total the store received around 1,000 access requests on an annual basis and confirmed that 950 of these were handled on time. Moreover, the online store had policies in place to safeguard that all access requests were handled correctly and fully. Nevertheless, the supervisory authority concluded that the online store infringed Article 12(3) GDPR and decided to impose a fine. During the calculation of the amount of the fine to be imposed, the supervisory authority was tasked with assessing the seriousness of this case. As a starting point, the supervisory authority noted that an infringement of Article 12 GDPR is listed among the infringements of Article 83(5) GDPR and therefore falls within the higher tier of Article 83 GDPR. Secondly, the supervisory authority assessed the circumstances of the case. In that regard, the supervisory authority carefully analysed the nature of the infringement. Even though the timely right to access to personal data is one of the cornerstones of the data subject rights, the supervisory authority considered that the infringement was of limited seriousness in this respect, given that all requests were handled eventually and with a limited delay. Considering the purpose of the processing, the supervisory authority found that the processing of personal data was not the core activity of the online store, but still an important ancillary in fulfilling its objective of selling goods online. The supervisory authority considered this to increase the seriousness of the infringement. On the other hand, the level of damage suffered by the data subjects was considered minimal, as all access requests were handled within 6 months. Taking all the above into account (nature of the infringement, purpose of the processing and level of damage), the supervisory authority concludes that the infringement is considered to be at a low level of seriousness. The supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 0 and 10% of the legal maximum included in Article 83(5) GDPR. 4.3 - Turnover of the undertaking with a view to imposing an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine 63. The GDPR requires each supervisory authority to ensure that the imposition of administrative fines is effective, proportionate and dissuasive in each individual case (Article 83(1) GDPR). The application of these principles of European Union law can have far-reaching consequences in individual cases, as the starting points that the GDPR offers for calculating administrative fines apply to micro-enterprises and multinational corporations alike. In order to impose a fine that is effective, proportionate and dissuasive in all cases, supervisory authorities are expected to tailor administrative fines within the entire range available up until the legal maximum. This can lead to significant increases or decreases of the amount of the fine, depending on the circumstances of the case. --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted 64. The EDPB considers that it is fair to reflect a distinction of the size of the undertaking in the starting points identified below and therefore takes into account its turnover. 28 The EDPB follows the requirements of Article 83 GDPR, the GDPR as a whole and the established case law of the CJEU stating that the turnover of an undertaking can constitute an indication of the size and economic power of an undertaking. 29 However, this does not dismiss a supervisory authority from the responsibility to carry out a review of effectiveness, dissuasiveness and proportionality at the end of the calculation (see Chapter 7). The latter covers all the circumstances of the case, including e.g. the accumulation of multiple infringements, increases and decreases for aggravating and mitigating circumstances and financial/socio-economic circumstances. It is, however, incumbent upon the supervisory authority to ensure that the same circumstances are not counted twice. In particular, supervisory authorities should not, under Chapter 7, repeat the increases or decreases relative to the turnover of the company, but rather revisit their evaluation of the appropriate starting amount. 65. For the reasons outlined above, the supervisory authority may consider adjusting the starting amount corresponding to the seriousness of the infringement in cases where this infringement is committed by an undertaking with an annual turnover not exceeding 2 million euros, an annual turnover not exceeding 10 million euros, or an annual turnover not exceeding 50 million euros30. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of ≤ €2m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 0.2% and 0.4% of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover of €2m up until €10m, supervisory authorities may consider to proceed calculations on the basis of a sum between 0.3% and 2% of the identified starting amount. - For undertakings with an annual turnover