fundamental importance for adjusting the amount of the fine to the specific case. In this sense, it is considered that it should be interpreted as an instance of the principle of fairness and justice applied to the individual case. 109. The scope of this provision, which is necessarily open-ended, should include all the reasoned considerations regarding the socio-economic context in which the controller or processor operates, those relating to the legal context and those concerning the market context41. 110. In particular, economic gain from the infringement could be an aggravating circumstance if the case provides information about profit obtained as a result of the infringement of the GDPR. 111. Exceptional circumstances that can lead to significant changes in the socio-economic context (e.g. the onset of a serious pandemic emergency that could radically change the way processing of personal data is carried out) could also be considered under Article 83(2)(k) GDPR. NB: The examples in this Chapter are illustrations of the effect that aggravating and mitigating circumstances may have on the amount of the fine. The increases or decreases mentioned in these imaginary cases cannot be considered precedents or indications of percentages to be used in real life cases. Example 7a – Weighing aggravating and mitigating circumstances A sports club used cameras with facial recognition technology at the entrance of one of their locations for the purpose of identifying their clients upon entry. As the sports club did so in contravention of Article 9 GDPR (processing of biometric data without a valid exception), the supervisory authority competent to investigate the infringement decided to impose a fine. Taking 40 Ibid. 41 The EDPB decided on this matter in EDPB Binding Decision 3/2022 on the dispute submitted by the Irish SA on Meta Platforms Ireland Limited and its Facebook Service (Art. 65 GDPR) (hereinafter referred to as “EDPB Binding Decision 3/2022”), paragraph 368. --- PAGE 32 --- Adopted into account all the relevant circumstances of the case, the supervisory authority considered this an infringement with a high level of seriousness, and since the sports club had an annual turnover of €150 million, a starting amount of €2,000,000 (at the very top of the category) was considered appropriate. However, the same sports club was fined two years earlier for using fingerprint technology at the turnstiles in another location. The supervisory authority decided to take this into account as a repeat offence (Article 83(2)(e) GDPR). In doing so, it attributed weight to the fact that this concerned nearly the same subject matter and the infringement was committed only two years prior. Because of this aggravating factor, the supervisory authority decided to increase the fine in this particular case to €2,600,000, 42 not exceeding the applicable legal maximum of €20 million. NB: The examples in this Chapter are illustrations of the effect that aggravating and mitigating circumstances may have on the amount of the fine. The increases or decreases mentioned in these imaginary cases cannot be considered precedents or indications of percentages to be used in real life cases. Example 7b – Weighing aggravating and mitigating circumstances The operator of a short-term car rental platform suffered a data breach, causing the personal data of its clients to have been vulnerable for a short amount of time. Taking into account all the relevant circumstances of the case, the supervisory authority considered the shortcomings of the operator in securing its platform to infringe Article 32 GDPR, to be an infringement of a low level of seriousness, and since the operator had an annual turnover of €255 million, a starting amount of €260,000 was considered appropriate. The compromised personal data included copies of drivers’ licences and IDs. For that reason, all clients that suffered from the data breach were forced to reapply for these documents in order to limit the possibility of identity theft. While informing the data subjects of this incident, the operator offered all data subjects assistance in reapplying for these documents with the correct public institutions and created a system to reimburse any fees paid for the application. The supervisory considered this as ‘actions to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects’ (Article 83(2)(c) GDPR), which had a mitigating effect on the fine. Given the proactive attitude and the effectiveness of the measures taken by the operator, the supervisory authority decided to lower the fine to €225,000,43 again not exceeding the legal maximum of €10 million. The examples in this Chapter are illustrations of the effect that aggravating and mitigating circumstances may have on the amount of the fine. The increases or decreases mentioned in these imaginary cases cannot be considered precedents or indications of percentages to be used in real life cases. Example 7c – Weighing aggravating and mitigating circumstances 42 This illustrates that the categories for starting amounts do not limit the supervisory authorities’ abilities to take into account aggravating and mitigating circumstances to an amount above or below the categories. As is reiterated in Chapter 4.3., these figures are the starting points for further calculation, and not fixed amounts (price tags) for infringements of provisions of the GDPR. The supervisory authority retains the discretion to utilise the full fining range from a point above €0 until the legal maximum, ensuring that the fine is tailored to the circumstances of the case. 43 Please see previous footnote. --- PAGE 33 --- Adopted A small credit rating agency was found to have infringed several provisions safeguarding data subject rights, most notably because it charged its clients a fee for exercising their right to access. The agency did so for all access requests, not just those mentioned in Article 12(5)(a) GDPR. Taking into account all the relevant circumstances of the case, the supervisory authority considered the infringements found to be of a high level of seriousness, and since the agency had an annual turnover of €35 million, a starting amount of €100,000 was considered appropriate. However, the supervisory authority considered the fact that the agency was able to profit from the infringement an aggravating circumstance (Article 83(2)(k) GDPR. With a view to counterbalancing the gains from the infringement, while maintaining an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine in this case, the supervisory authority decided to increase the fine to €130,000, not exceeding the applicable legal maximum of €20 million. The examples in this Chapter are illustrations of the effect that aggravating and mitigating circumstances may have on the amount of the fine. The increases or decreases mentioned in these imaginary cases cannot be considered precedents or indications of percentages to be used in real life cases. Example 7d – Weighing aggravating and mitigating circumstances A company was found to have infringed provisions of GDPR, most notably because of selling its database for commercial prospecting to partners containing personal data related to people who did not give their consent to be prospected for commercial purposes. Considering all the relevant circumstances of the case, the supervisory authority considered the infringements found to be of a medium level of seriousness, and since the company had an annual turnover of €45 million, a starting amount of €150,000- was considered appropriate. Moreover, the authority considered that this was an infringement that benefited the controller because the fact of not having collected the consent of the people for the transmission of their data for the purpose of sending targeting advertising increased the mass of data that it has been able to resell afterwards. Thus, the supervisory authority considered the fact that the agency was able to profit from the infringement an aggravating circumstance (Article 83(2)(k) GDPR). With a view to counterbalancing the gains from the infringement, while maintaining an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine in this case, the supervisory authority decided to increase the fine to €200,000 not exceeding the applicable legal maximum of €20 million. --- PAGE 34 --- Adopted CHAPTER 6 – LEGAL MAXIMUM AND CORPORATE LIABILITY 6.1 - Determining the Legal Maximum 112. As already outlined in the Guidelines WP253, the GDPR does not tag fixed sums to specific infringements. Instead, the GDPR provides for overall maximum amounts44 and thereby follows the general tradition of EU law on sanctions already established by other legal acts45. 113. The amounts in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR constitute the legal maximum and prohibit the supervisory authorities from imposing fines that in their outcome exceed the applicable maximum amounts. In order to determine the correct legal maximum, Article 83(3) GDPR needs to be taken into account46, where applicable (see Chapter 3.1.2). Each supervisory authority therefore has to ensure that these maximum amounts are not exceeded when calculating fines based on these Guidelines. Depending on the individual case, different maximum amounts may become relevant. 6.1.1 - Static maximum amounts 114. Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR provide for static amounts as a rule and differentiate between infringements of different categories of obligations under the GDPR. As explained above, Article 83(4) GDPR allows for fines up to €10 million for infringing the obligations outlined therein, while Article 83(5) and (6) GDPR allow for fines up to €20 million for infringing the