P, The Goldman Sachs Group v Commission, ECLI: EU: C: 2021:73, paragraph 32, quoting case C 611/18 P, Pirelli & C. v Commission, not published, paragraph 68, and the case-law cited. --- PAGE 38 --- Adopted 127. The fine is imposed63 on the (joint-) controller(s)/processor(s), and the competent supervisory authority has the option to hold the parent company jointly and severally liable64 for the payment of the fine. 6.2.2 - Determining the turnover 128. Turnover is taken from the annual accounts of an undertaking, which are drawn up with reference to its business year and provide an overview of the past financial year of a company or of a group of companies (consolidated accounts). Turnover is defined as the sum of all goods and services sold. Net turnover means the amount derived from the sale of products and the provision of services after deducting sales rebates and value added tax (VAT) and other taxes directly linked to turnover65. 129. Turnover is taken from the presentation of the profit and loss account. 66 Net turnover includes revenue from the sale, rental and leasing of products and revenue from the sale of services less sales deductions (e.g. rebates, discounts) and VAT. 130. If the undertaking is subject to the obligation to prepare consolidated annual financial statements, 67 these consolidated financial statements of the parent company heading the group are relevant for reflecting the combined turnover of the undertaking. 68 If such statements do not exist, any other documents shall be obtained and used that are apt to infer the worldwide annual turnover of the undertaking in the relevant business year. 131. Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR state that the total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding financial year is to be used. As to the question of which event the term “preceding” relates to, the CJEU case law in competition law is also to be applied for GDPR fines so that the relevant event is the fining decision issued by the supervisory authority and neither the time of infringement nor the court decision. 69 In case of cross-border processing the relevant fining decision is not the draft decision, but rather the final decision issued by the Lead Supervisory Authority. 70 Where the draft decision enters the Article 60 co-decision-making process towards the end of a calendar year, such that the final decision is unlikely to be adopted within that same calendar year, the Lead Supervisory Authority will calculate any proposed fine by reference to the most up to date financial information available as at the date on which the draft decision is circulated to the 63 The decision in which the fine is imposed is addressed and delivered to the controller(s)/processor(s) as the offender(s) of the infringement and can additionally be addressed and delivered to other legal entities of the SEU that are jointly and severally liable for the fine. 64 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 290. 65 See e.g., Article 2(5) of Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amending Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC (hereinafter “Directive 2013/34/EU”), which is applicable to companies with limited liability, or similar applicable legislation and Article 5(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No. 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (hereinafter “EC Merger Regulation”). 66 See e.g., Annexes V or VI to Article 13(1) of Directive 2013/34/EU under the heading “net turnover”, or similar applicable legislation. 67 See, for example, Article 21 et seq. of Directive 2013/34/EU, or similar applicable legislation. 68 C-58/12 P Groupe Gascogne SA v European Commission, ECLI:EU:C:2013:770, paragraphs 54-55. 69 Regional Court LG Bonn, case 29 OWi 1/20, 11 November 2020, paragraph95, referencing case C-637/13 P, Badezimmerkartell Laufen Austria, para. 49 and case C-408/12 P, YKK et al, para. 90.. 70 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 298. --- PAGE 39 --- Adopted supervisory authorities concerned for their views. That information will then be updated, as required, prior to the finalisation and adoption of the final national decision by the Lead Supervisory Authority. CHAPTER 7 – EFFECTIVENESS, PROPORTIONALITY AND DISSUASIVENESS 132. It is required that the administrative fine imposed for infringements of the GDPR referred to in Article 83(4)– (6) shall in each individual case be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. In other words, the amount of the fine imposed is tailored to the infringement committed in its specific context. The EDPB considers it incumbent upon the supervisory authorities to verify whether the amount of the fine meets these requirements, or whether further adjustments to the amount are necessary. 133. As explained in Chapter 4, the evaluation performed in this Chapter covers the entirety of the fine imposed and all the circumstances of the case, including e.g. the accumulation of multiple infringements, increases and decreases for aggravating and mitigating circumstances and financial/socio-economic circumstances. It is, however, incumbent upon the supervisory authority to ensure that the same circumstances are not counted twice. 134. In case these adjustments merit an increase in fine, such increase can – by definition – not exceed the legal maximum identified in Chapter 6 above. 7.1 - Effectiveness 135. Generally speaking, a fine can be considered effective if it achieves the objectives with which it was imposed. This could be to re-establish compliance with the rules, to punish unlawful behaviour, or both. 71 Moreover, Recital 148 GDPR emphasises that administrative fines should be imposed “in order to strengthen the enforcement of the rules of this Regulation.” The amount of the fine imposed on the basis of these Guidelines should therefore be sufficient to meet these objectives. 136. As Article 83(2) GDPR requires, the supervisory authority has to evaluate the effectiveness of the fine in each individual case. To that end, due regard must be given to the circumstances of the case, and in particular to the assessment made above, 72 bearing in mind that the fine should also be proportionate and dissuasive as outlined below. 7.2 - Proportionality 137. The principle of proportionality requires that measures adopted do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the objectives legitimately pursued by the legislation in question; where there is a choice between several appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued73. 71 Guidelines WP 253, p. 6. 72 As Recital 148 GDPR also outlines: “the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement, the intentional character of the infringement, actions taken to mitigate the damage suffered, degree of responsibility or any relevant previous infringements, the manner in which the infringement became known to the supervisory authority, compliance with measures ordered against the controller or processor, adherence to a code of conduct and any other aggravating or mitigating factor”. 73 Case T-704/14, Marine Harvest v Commission, paragraph 580, referencing case T‐332/09, Electrabel v Commission, paragraph 279. --- PAGE 40 --- Adopted 138. It follows that fines must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued (i.e. compliance with the rules relating to the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and rules relating to the free movement of personal data), and that the amount of the fine imposed must be proportionate to the infringement, viewed as a whole, account being taken, in particular, of the gravity of the infringement74. 139. The supervisory authority shall therefore verify that the amount of the fine is proportionate both to the severity of the infringement and to the size of the undertaking to which the entity that committed the infringement belongs, 75 and that the fine imposed shall thereby not exceed what is necessary to achieve the objectives pursued by the GDPR. 140. As a particular derivative of the principle of proportionality, the supervisory authority may consider – in accordance with national law – to further reduce the fine on the basis of the principle of inability to pay. Any such reduction requires exceptional circumstances. In line with the European Commission’s Guidelines on the method of setting fines76, there has to be objective evidence that the imposition of the fine would irretrievably jeopardise the economic viability of the undertaking concerned. Furthermore, the risks need to be analysed in a specific social and economic context. a) Economic viability: The undertaking is required to provide detailed financial data (for the last five years as well as projections for the current and next two years) to allow the supervisory authority to examine the likely future development of key factors such as solvency, liquidity and profitability. The European Courts have stated that, the mere circumstance that an undertaking is in a poor financial situation, or will be after a large fine, does not meet the requirement “since recognition of such an obligation would be tantamount to giving an unjustified competitive advantage to undertakings least well adapted to the market conditions.”77 The assessment of the