when quantifying the fine, taking into account the conditions of that framework. 54. The supervisory authority may attribute weight to the abovementioned factors, depending on the circumstances of the case. If not of particular relevance, they may also be considered as neutral. 4.2.2 - Intentional or negligent character of the infringement 55. In its previous guidance, the EDPB stated that “in general, intent includes both knowledge and willfulness in relation to the characteristics of an offence, whereas ’unintentional’ means that there was no intention to --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted cause the infringement although the controller/processor breached the duty of care which is required in the law.”23 Unintentional in this sense does not equate to non-voluntary. Example 4 – Illustrations of intent and negligence (from WP 253)24 “Circumstances indicative of intentional breaches might be unlawful processing authorised explicitly by the top management hierarchy of the controller, or in spite of advice from the data protection officer or in disregard for existing policies, for example obtaining and processing data about employees at a competitor with an intention to discredit that competitor in the market. Other examples here might be: - amending personal data to give a misleading (positive) impression about whether targets have been met – we have seen this in the context of targets for hospital waiting times - the trade of personal data for marketing purpose i.e. selling data as ‘opted in’ without checking/disregarding data subjects’ views about how their data should be used Other circumstances, such as failure to read and abide by existing policies, human error, failure to check for personal data in information published, failure to apply technical updates in a timely manner, failure to adopt policies (rather than simply failure to apply them) may be indicative of negligence”; 56. The intentional or negligent character of the infringement (Article 83(2)(b) GDPR) should be assessed taking into account the objective elements of conduct gathered from the facts of the case. The EDPB highlighted that it is generally admitted that intentional infringements, “demonstrating contempt for the provisions of the law, are more severe than unintentional ones”25. In case of an intentional infringement, the supervisory authority is likely to attribute more weight to this factor. Depending on the circumstances of the case, the supervisory authority may also attach weight to the degree of negligence. At best, negligence could be regarded as neutral. 4.2.3 - Categories of personal data affected 57. Concerning the requirement to take account of the categories of personal data affected (Article 83(2)(g) GDPR), the GDPR clearly highlights the types of data that deserve special protection and therefore a stricter response in terms of fines. This concerns, at the very least, the types of data covered by Articles 9 and 10 GDPR, and data outside the scope of these Articles the dissemination of which causes immediate damages or distress to the data subject26 (e.g. location data, data on private communication, national identification numbers, or financial data, such as transaction overviews or credit card numbers). 27 In general, the more of such categories of data involved or the more sensitive the data, the more weight the supervisory authority may attribute to this factor. 58. Further, the amount of data regarding each data subject is of relevance, considering that the infringement of the right to privacy and protection of personal data increases with the amount of data regarding each data subject. 23 Guidelines WP 253, p. 11. 24 Examples quoted directly from Guidelines WP 253, p. 12. 25 Guidelines WP 253, p. 12. 26 Ibid, p. 14. 27 Dissemination of private communications and location data can cause immediate damages or distress to the data subject, which has been highlighted by the special protection awarded by the EU Legislator to private communications in Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Directive 2002/58/EC and by the CJEU for location data in certain cases, see joined cases C-511/18, C-512/18 and C-520/18, La Quadrature du Net et al, paragraph 117 and the case law there cited. --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted 4.2.4 - Classifying the seriousness of the infringement and identifying the appropriate starting amount 59. The assessment of the factors above (Chapter 4.2.1–4.2.3) determines the seriousness of the infringement as a whole. This assessment is no mathematical calculation in which the abovementioned factors are considered individually, but rather a thorough evaluation of the concrete circumstances of the case, in which all of the abovementioned factors are interlinked. Therefore, in reviewing the seriousness of the infringement, regard should be given to the infringement as a whole. 60. Based on the evaluation of the factors outlined above, the infringement is considered to be of a (i) low, (ii) medium, or (iii) high level of seriousness. These categories are without prejudice to the question whether or not a fine can be imposed. - When calculating the administrative fine for infringements of a low level of seriousness, the supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 0 and 10% of the applicable legal maximum. - When calculating the administrative fine for infringements of a medium level of seriousness, the supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 10 and 20% of the applicable legal maximum. - When calculating the administrative fine infringements of a high level of seriousness, the supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 20 and 100% of the applicable legal maximum. 61. As a general rule, the more severe the infringement within its own category, the higher the starting amount is likely to be. 62. The ranges within which the starting amount is determined remains under review by the EDPB and its members and can be adapted when necessary. Example 5a – Qualifying the seriousness of an infringement (high level of seriousness) After investigating numerous complaints about unsolicited calls from customers of a telephone company, the competent supervisory authority found that the telephone company used contact details of its customers for telemarketing purposes without a valid legal basis (infringement of Article 6 GDPR). In particular, the telephone company had offered the names and registered phone numbers of its customers to third parties for marketing purposes. The telephone company did this despite advice against it from the data protection officer, without undertaking any efforts to curb the practice or to offer customers a way of objecting. In fact, the practice had been going on since May 2018 and was still ongoing at the time of the investigation. The telephone company in question operated nationwide and the practice affected all of its 4 million customers. The supervisory authority found that all of these customers had been regularly subjected to unsolicited calls by third parties, without any effective means to stop them. The supervisory authority was tasked with assessing the seriousness of this case. As a starting point, the supervisory authority noted that an infringement of Article 6 GDPR is listed among the infringements of Article 83(5) GDPR and therefore falls within the higher tier of Article 83 GDPR. Secondly, the supervisory authority assessed the circumstances of the case. In that regard, the supervisory authority attributed significant weight to nature of the infringement, as the infringed provision (Article 6 GDPR) underpins the legality of the data processing as a whole. Non-compliance --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted with this provision removes the lawfulness of the processing as a whole. Also, the supervisory authority attributed significant weight to the duration of the infringement, which started at the entry into force of the GDPR and had not ceased at the time of the investigation. The fact that the telephone company operated nationwide increased the weight of the scope of the processing. The number of data subjects involved was considered very high (4 million, offset against a total population of 14 million people), while the level of damage suffered by them was considered moderate (non-material damage, in the form of nuisance). The latter assessment was made taking into account the categories of data affected (name and phone number). The seriousness of the infringement was increased, however, by the fact that the infringement was committed in contrary to an advice from the data protection officer and, thus, considered intentional. Taking all the above into account (serious nature, long duration, high number of data subjects, nationwide scope, intentional nature, vis-à-vis moderate damage), the supervisory concludes that the infringement is considered to be at a high level of seriousness. The supervisory authority will determine the starting amount for further calculation at a point between 20 and 100% of the legal maximum included in Article 83(5) GDPR. Example 5b – Qualifying the seriousness of an infringement (medium level of seriousness) A supervisory authority received a personal data breach notification from a hospital. From this notification, it appeared that several staff members had been able to view parts of patients’ health files that – based on their department – should not have been accessible to them. The hospital had been working on procedures to