be considered as being “linked” and forming the same conduct. This also includes the failure to register the processing activity in the records, to inform data subjects and to establish procedures to give effect to the right of access with regard to the new processing operations. These obligations have been infringed for linked processing operations. Example 1c – Not the same or linked processing operations (i) A building authority performs a background check of a job applicant. The background check also includes the political affinity, union membership and sexual orientation. (ii) Five days later, the building authority demands from its vendors (sole traders) excessive self-disclosure regarding their business deals with other entities, irrespective of any relevance to the contract with or compliance obligations of the building authority. (iii) Another week later, the building authority suffers a personal data breach. The network of the building authority is hacked – despite having adequate technical and organisational measures in place – and the hacker gains access to a system that processes personal data of citizens that had filed requests with the building authority. Despite the data were adequately encrypted in line with applicable standards, the hacker is able to break it with military decryption technology and sells the data in the dark net. The building authority refrains from notifying the supervisory authority, despite its obligation to do so. The processing operations concerned in this case i.e. the background check, the demands of self-disclosure from vendors and the failure to notify a personal data breach, are not contextually related. Therefore, they are not to be considered “linked”, but instead form different conducts. 29. Where it is established that the circumstances of the case form one and the same conduct and give rise to a single infringement, the fine can be calculated based on that infringement and its legal maximum. However, if the circumstances of the case form one and the same conduct, but this conduct gives rise to not only one, but multiple infringements, it must be established whether the attribution of one infringement precludes attribution of another infringement (Chapter 3.1.1) or can they be attributed alongside each other (Chapter 3.1.2). Where the circumstances of the case form multiple conducts, they are to be considered a plurality of actions and handled in line with Chapter 3.2. 3.1.1 - Concurrence of Offences 30. The principle of concurrence of offences (also referred to as “apparent concurrence”6 or “false concurrence”) applies wherever the application of one provision precludes or subsumes the applicability of the other. In other words, concurrence occurs already on the abstract level of statutory provisions. This could either be on grounds of the principle of specialty7, subsidiarity or consumption, which often apply where provisions protect the same legal interest. In such cases, it would be unlawful to sanction the offender for the same wrongdoing twice8. 31. In such a case of concurrence of offences, the amount of the fine should be calculated only on the basis of the infringement selected according to above rules (superseding infringement)”9. 6 See, for example, Austrian Verwaltungsgerichtshof, Ra 2018/02/0123, paragraph 9. 7 As assessed in case C-10/18 P, Marine Harvest v. Commission. 8 See, for example, Austrian Verwaltungsgerichtshof, Ra 2018/02/0123, paragraph 7. 9 As assessed in case C-10/18 P, Marine Harvest v. Commission. --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted Principle of specialty 10 32. The principle of specialty (specialia generalibus derogant) is a legal principle that means that more specific provision (derived from the same legal act or different legal acts of the same force) supersedes a more general provision, although both pursue the same objective. The more specific infringement then is sometimes considered a “qualified type” to the less specific one. Qualified type of infringement might be subject to a higher tier of fine, higher legal maximum or more extensive period of limitation. 33. However, sometimes by way of interpretation, specialty can also apply, where for reasons of nature and systematics one infringement is considered a qualification of an apparently more specific one, although its wording alone does not explicitly name an additional element. 34. Where instead two provisions pursue autonomous objectives, this constitutes a differentiating factor that justifies the imposition of separate fines. For example, if an infringement of one provision automatically results in an infringement of the other, but the converse is not true, these infringements pursue autonomous objectives. 35. These principles of specialty can only apply, if and as far as the objectives pursued by the concerned infringements are actually congruent in the individual case. As the data protection principles in Article 5 GDPR are established as overarching concepts, there can be situations where other provisions are a concretisation of such principle, but not circumscribing the principle in its entirety. In other words, a provision does not always define the full scope of the principle. 11 Therefore, depending on the circumstances, 12 in some cases, they overlap in a congruent way and one infringement might supersede the other, while in other cases, the overlap is only partial and therefore not fully congruent. As far as they are not congruent, there is no concurrence of offences. Instead, they can be applied alongside each other, when calculating the fine. Principle of subsidiarity 36. Another form of concurrence of offences is often referred to as the principle of subsidiarity. It applies were one infringement is considered subsidiary to another infringement. This could be either because the law formally declares subsidiarity or because subsidiarity is given for material reasons. 13 The latter can be the case where the infringements have the same objective, but one contains a lesser accusation of immorality or wrongdoing (e.g. an administrative offence can be subsidiary to criminal offence, etc.). 10 As assessed in case C-10/18 P, Marine Harvest v. Commission. 11 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021 on the dispute arisen on the draft decision of the Irish Supervisory Authority regarding WhatsApp Ireland under Article 65(1)(a) GDPR (hereinafter referred to as “EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021”), paragraph 192. 12 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 193. 13 The idea of a formal subsidiarity indirectly is also entailed in Article 35(2) of Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity across the Union, amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972, and repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (“NIS 2 Directive”), although the conflict is solved on a procedural rather than material level. The provision regulates that “where the supervisory authorities as referred to in Article 55 or 56 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 impose an administrative fine pursuant to Art. 58(2)(i) GDPR, the competent authorities shall not impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 34 NIS 2 Directive for an infringement referred to in Article 35(1) NIS 2 Directive arising from the same conduct as that which was the subject of the administrative fine under Article 58(2)(i) GDPR.” Insofar as the infringement referred to in Article 35(1) NIS 2 Directive is indirectly considered subsidiary to a fine based on GDPR where this concerns the same conduct. --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted Principle of consumption 37. The principle of consumption applies in cases where the infringement of one provision regularly leads to the infringement of the other, often because one infringement is a preliminary step to the other. 3.1.2 - Unity of action - Article 83(3) GDPR 38. Similar to the situation of concurrence of offences the principle of unity of action (also referred to as “ideal concurrence”) applies in cases where one conduct is caught by several statutory provisions, with the difference that one provision is neither precluded nor subsumed by the applicability of the other, because they do not fall in scope of the principles of specialty, subsidiarity or consumption and mostly pursue different objectives. 39. The principle of unity of action was further specified on the level of secondary law in Article 83(3) GDPR in form of a “unity of processing”. It is important to understand that Article 83(3) GDPR is limited in its application and will not apply to every single case in which multiple infringements are found to have occurred, but only to those cases where multiple infringements have arisen from “the same or linked processing operations” as explained above. 14 In these cases, the total amount of the administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specified for the gravest infringement15. 40. In some special cases, a unity of action might also be assumed, where a single action infringes the same statutory provision several times. This could be particularly the case, where circumstances form an iterative and congeneric infringement of the same statutory provision in a close spatial and temporal succession. Example 2 – Unity of action A controller sends bundles of marketing e-mails to groups of data subjects in different waves during the course of one day without having a legal ground and thereby infringes Article 6(1) GDPR with one unity of action several times. 41. The wording in Article 83(3) GDPR does not seem to directly cover this latter