specified on the level of secondary law in Article 83(3) GDPR in form of a “unity of processing”. It is important to understand that Article 83(3) GDPR is limited in its application and will not apply to every single case in which multiple infringements are found to have occurred, but only to those cases where multiple infringements have arisen from “the same or linked processing operations” as explained above. 14 In these cases, the total amount of the administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specified for the gravest infringement15. 40. In some special cases, a unity of action might also be assumed, where a single action infringes the same statutory provision several times. This could be particularly the case, where circumstances form an iterative and congeneric infringement of the same statutory provision in a close spatial and temporal succession. Example 2 – Unity of action A controller sends bundles of marketing e-mails to groups of data subjects in different waves during the course of one day without having a legal ground and thereby infringes Article 6(1) GDPR with one unity of action several times. 41. The wording in Article 83(3) GDPR does not seem to directly cover this latter case of a unity of action, since “several provisions” are not infringed. However, it would constitute unequal and unfair treatment, if an offender that by one action infringes different provisions that pursue different objectives would be privileged against an offender that infringes with the same action the same provision that pursues the same objective multiple times. To avoid inconsistency of legal principle and in order to comply with the fundamental right to equal treatment in the Charter, in such cases, Article 83(3) GDPR shall be applied mutatis mutandis. 42. In case of a unity of action the total amount of the administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specified for the gravest infringement. “As regards the interpretation of Article 83(3) GDPR, the EDPB points out that the effet utile principle requires all institutions to give full force and effect to EU law”16. In this regard, Article 14 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 320. 15 Article 83(3) GDPR states in full: “If a controller or processor intentionally or negligently, for the same or linked processing operations, infringes several provisions of this Regulation, the total amount of the administrative fine shall not exceed the amount specified for the gravest infringement.” 16 EDPB Binding Decision 1/2021, paragraph 322. --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted 83(3) GDPR must not be interpreted in a manner where “it would not matter if an offender committed one or numerous infringements of the GDPR when assessing the fine”17. 43. The term “total amount” implies that all the infringements committed have to be taken into account when assessing the amount of the fine, 18 and the wording “amount specified for the gravest infringement” refers to the legal maximums of fines (e.g. Articles 83(4)–(6) GDPR). Therefore, “although the fine itself may not exceed the legal maximum of the highest fining tier, the offender shall still be explicitly found guilty of having infringed several provisions and these infringements have to be taken into account when assessing the amount of the final fine that is to be imposed” 19. While this is without prejudice to the duty for the supervisory authority imposing the fine to take into account the need for the fine to be proportionate, the other infringements committed cannot be discarded and instead have to be taken into account when calculating the fine. 3.2 - Multiple sanctionable conducts 44. The principle of plurality of actions (also referred to as “Realkonkurrenz”, “factual concurrence” or “coincidental concurrence”) describes all cases not caught by the principles of concurrence of offences (Chapter 3.1.1) or Article 83(3) GDPR (Chapter 3.1.2). 45. The only reason that these infringements are handled in one decision is by having coincidentally come to the attention of the supervisory authority at the same time without being the same or linked processing operations in the meaning of Article 83(3) GDPR. Therefore, the offender is found to have infringed several statutory provisions and separate fines are imposed according to the national procedure either in the same fining decision or separate fining decisions. Moreover, since Article 83(3) GDPR does not apply, the total amount of the administrative fine may exceed the amount specified for the gravest infringement (argumentum e contrario). Cases of plurality of actions do not pose any reason to privilege the offender with regard to the fining calculation. However, this is without prejudice to the obligation to still comply with the general principle of proportionality. Example 3 – Plurality of action After conducting a data protection inspection at the premises of a controller, the supervisory authority finds that the controller failed to establish a procedure for review and continued improvement of its website security, to provide Article 13 information to employees regarding HR data processing and to inform the supervisory authority of a recent data breach regarding its vendor data. None of the infringements is precluded or subsumed by way of specialty, subsidiarity or consumption. Also, they do not qualify as the same processing operation or linked processing operations: they do not form a unity of action, but a plurality of actions. The supervisory authority therefore will find the controller to have infringed by different conducts Articles 13, 32, and 33 GDPR. It will impose in its fining decision individual fines for each, without there being a single legal maximum applicable to their sum. 17 Ibid, paragraph 323. 18 Ibid, paragraph 325. 19 Ibid, paragraph 326. --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted CHAPTER 4 – STARTING POINT FOR CALCULATION 46. The EDPB considers that the calculation of administrative fines should commence from a harmonised starting point20. This starting point forms the beginning for further calculation, in which all circumstances of the case are taken into account and weighted, resulting in the final amount of the fine to be imposed upon the controller or processor. 47. The identification of harmonised starting points in these Guidelines does not and should not preclude supervisory authorities from assessing each case on its merits. The fine imposed upon a controller/processor can range from any amount until the legal maximum of the fine, provided that this fine is effective, dissuasive and proportionate. The existence of a starting point does not prevent the supervisory authority from lowering or increasing the fine (up to its maximum) if the circumstances of the case so require. 48. The EDPB considers three elements to form the starting point for further calculation: the categorisation of infringements by nature under Articles 83(4)–(6) GDPR, the seriousness of the infringement (as discussed in section 4.2 below) and the turnover of the undertaking as one relevant element to take into consideration with a view to imposing an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine, pursuant to Article 83(1) GDPR. These are outlined in Chapter 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 below. 4.1 - Categorisation of infringements under Articles 83(4)–(6) GDPR 49. Almost all of the obligations of the controllers and processors according to the Regulation are categorised according to their nature in the provisions of Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR. 21 The GDPR provides for two categories of infringements: infringements punishable under Article 83(4) GDPR on the one hand, and infringements punishable under Article 83(5) and (6) GDPR on the other. The first category of infringements is punishable by a fine maximum of €10 million or 2% of the undertaking’s annual turnover, whichever is higher, whereas the second is punishable by a fine maximum of €20 million or 4% of the undertaking’s annual turnover, whichever is higher. 50. With this distinction, the legislator provided a first indication of the seriousness of the infringement in an abstract sense. The more serious the infringement, the higher the fine is likely to be. 4.2 - Seriousness of the infringement in each individual case 51. The GDPR requires the supervisory authority to give due regard to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement, taking into account the nature, scope or purpose of the processing concerned, as well as the number of data subjects affected and the level of damage suffered by them (Article 83(2)(a) GDPR); the intentional or negligent character of the infringement (Article 83(2)(b) GDPR); and the categories of personal data affected by the infringement (Article 83(2)(g) GDPR). For the purposes of these Guidelines, the EDPB refers to these factors as the seriousness of the infringement. 20 Provided that Guidelines leave sufficient room for the tailoring of an administrative fine to the circumstances of the case, the Court of Justice of the EU (hereinafter “CJEU”) generally accepts calculations to commence from an abstract starting point. Particularly in joined cases C-189/02 P, C-202/02 P, C-205/02 P to C-208/02 P and C‐213/02 P, Dansk Rørindustri, but also more recently in case T-15/02, BASF AG v. Commission, paragraphs. 120-121; 134, case C-227/14 P, LG Display Co. Ltd v. Commission, paragraph 53 and case T-26/02, Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd v. Commission, paragraph 50. 21 See in this respect also Guidelines WP 253,