in each individual case 51. The GDPR requires the supervisory authority to give due regard to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement, taking into account the nature, scope or purpose of the processing concerned, as well as the number of data subjects affected and the level of damage suffered by them (Article 83(2)(a) GDPR); the intentional or negligent character of the infringement (Article 83(2)(b) GDPR); and the categories of personal data affected by the infringement (Article 83(2)(g) GDPR). For the purposes of these Guidelines, the EDPB refers to these factors as the seriousness of the infringement. 20 Provided that Guidelines leave sufficient room for the tailoring of an administrative fine to the circumstances of the case, the Court of Justice of the EU (hereinafter “CJEU”) generally accepts calculations to commence from an abstract starting point. Particularly in joined cases C-189/02 P, C-202/02 P, C-205/02 P to C-208/02 P and C‐213/02 P, Dansk Rørindustri, but also more recently in case T-15/02, BASF AG v. Commission, paragraphs. 120-121; 134, case C-227/14 P, LG Display Co. Ltd v. Commission, paragraph 53 and case T-26/02, Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd v. Commission, paragraph 50. 21 See in this respect also Guidelines WP 253, p. 9. --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted 52. The supervisory authority has to review these factors in the light of the circumstances of the specific case and has to conclude – on the basis of this analysis – on the degree of seriousness as indicated in paragraph 60. In this respect, the supervisory authority may also consider whether the data in question was directly identifiable. Even though they are discussed individually in these Guidelines, in reality these factors are often intertwined and should be viewed in relation to the facts of the case as a whole. 4.2.1 - Nature, gravity and duration of the infringement 53. Article 83(2)(a) GDPR is broad in scope and requires the supervisory authority to carry out a complete examination of all the elements that constitute the infringement and that are suitable to differentiate it from other infringements of the same kind. This assessment should therefore consider the following specific factors: a) The nature of the infringement, assessed by the concrete circumstances of the case. In that sense, this analysis is more specific than abstract classification of Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR. The supervisory authority may review the interest that the infringed provision seeks to protect and the place of this provision in the data protection framework. In addition, the supervisory authority may consider the degree to which the infringement prohibited the effective application of the provision and the fulfilment of the objective it sought to protect. b) The gravity of the infringement, assessed on the basis of the specific circumstances. As stated in Article 83(2)(a) GDPR, this concerns the nature of the processing, but also the “scope or purpose of the processing concerned as well as the number of data subjects affected and the level of damage suffered by them,” will be indicative of the gravity of the infringement. i. The nature of the processing, including the context in which the processing is functionally based (e.g. business activity, non-profit, political party, etc.) and all the characteristics of the processing. 22 When the nature of processing entails higher risks, e.g. where the purpose is to monitor, evaluate personal aspects or to take decisions or measures with negative effects for the data subjects, depending on the context of the processing and the role of the controller or processor, the supervisory authority may consider to attribute more weight to this factor. Further, a supervisory authority may attribute more weight to this factor when there is a clear imbalance between the data subjects and the controller (e.g., when the data subjects are employees, pupils or patients) or the processing involves vulnerable data subjects, in particular, children. ii. The scope of the processing, with reference to the local, national or cross-border scope of the processing carried out and the relationship between this information and the actual extent of the processing in terms of the allocation of resources by the data controller. This element highlights a real risk factor, linked to the greater difficulty for the data subject and the supervisory authority to curb unlawful conduct as the scope of the processing increases. The larger the scope of the processing, the more weight the supervisory authority may attribute to this factor. 22 By way of example, when analysing the element relating to the “nature of the infringement”, the EDPB in its Decision 01/2020 on the dispute arisen on the draft decision of the Irish Supervisory Authority regarding Twitter International Company under Article 65(1)(a) GDPR (hereinafter referred to as “EDPB Binding Decision 01/2020”) noted that the “processing concerned” involved communications by data subjects who deliberately chose to restrict the audience of such communications, and recommended that this aspect be taken into account when evaluating the nature of the processing. In this context see also EDPB Binding Decision 01/2020, paragraph 186. --- PAGE 19 --- Adopted iii. The purpose of the processing, will lead the supervisory authority to attribute more weight to this factor. The supervisory authority may also consider whether the processing of personal data falls within the so-called core activities of the controller. The more central the processing is to the controller’s or processor’s core activities, the more severe irregularities in this processing will be. The supervisory authority may attribute more weight to this factor in these circumstances. There may be circumstances though, in which the processing of personal data is further removed from the core activities of the controller or processor, but significantly impacts the evaluation nonetheless (this is the case, for example, of processing concerning personal data of workers where the infringement significantly affects those workers’ dignity). iv. The number of data subjects concretely but also potentially affected. The higher the number of data subjects involved, the more weight the supervisory authority may attribute to this factor. In many cases, it may also be considered that the infringement takes on "systemic" connotations and can therefore affect, even at different times, additional data subjects who have not submitted complaints or reports to the supervisory authority. The supervisory authority may, depending on the circumstances of the case, consider the ratio between the number of data subjects affected and the total number of data subjects in that context (e.g. the number of citizens, customers or employees) in order to assess whether the infringement is of a systemic nature. v. The level of damage suffered and the extent to which the conduct may affect individual rights and freedoms. The reference to the "level" of damage suffered, therefore, is intended to draw the attention of the supervisory authorities to the damage suffered, or likely to have been suffered as a further, separate parameter with respect to the number of data subjects involved (for example, in cases where the number of individuals affected by the unlawful processing is high but the damage suffered by them is marginal). Following Recital 75 GDPR, the level of damage suffered refers to physical, material or non-material damage. The assessment of the damage, in any case, be limited to what is functionally necessary to achieve correct evaluation of the level of seriousness of the infringement as indicated in paragraph 60 below, without overlapping with the activities of judicial authorities as tasked with ascertaining the different forms of individual harm. c) The duration of the infringement, meaning that a supervisory authority may generally attribute more weight to an infringement with longer duration. The longer the duration of the infringement, the more weight the supervisory authority may attribute to this factor. Subject to national law, if a given conduct was also illicit within the previous regulatory framework, both the period after the GDPR's effective date and the previous period may be taken into account when quantifying the fine, taking into account the conditions of that framework. 54. The supervisory authority may attribute weight to the abovementioned factors, depending on the circumstances of the case. If not of particular relevance, they may also be considered as neutral. 4.2.2 - Intentional or negligent character of the infringement 55. In its previous guidance, the EDPB stated that “in general, intent includes both knowledge and willfulness in relation to the characteristics of an offence, whereas ’unintentional’ means that there was no intention to --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted cause the infringement although the controller/processor breached the duty of care which is required in the law.”23 Unintentional in this sense does not equate to non-voluntary. Example 4 – Illustrations of intent and negligence (from WP 253)24 “Circumstances indicative of intentional breaches might be unlawful processing authorised explicitly by the top management hierarchy of the controller, or in spite of advice from the data protection officer or in disregard for existing policies, for example obtaining and processing data about employees at a competitor with an intention to discredit that competitor in the market. Other examples here might be: - amending personal data to give a misleading (positive) impression about whether