Step 2 Finding the starting point for further calculation based on an evaluation of (Chapter 4) a) the classification in Article 83(4)–(6) GDPR; b) the seriousness of the infringement pursuant to Article 83(2)(a), (b) and (g) GDPR; c) the turnover of the undertaking as one relevant element to take into consideration with a view to imposing an effective, dissuasive and proportionate fine, pursuant to Article 83(1) GDPR. Step 3 Evaluating aggravating and mitigating circumstances related to past or present behaviour of the controller/processor and increasing or decreasing the fine accordingly. (Chapter 5) Step 4 Identifying the relevant legal maximums for the different processing operations. Increases applied in previous or next steps cannot exceed this amount. (Chapter 6) Step 5 Analysing whether the final amount of the calculated fine meets the requirements of effectiveness, dissuasiveness and proportionality, as required by Article 83(1) GDPR, and increasing or decreasing the fine accordingly. (Chapter 7) 2.3 - Infringements with fixed amounts 18. In certain circumstances, the supervisory authority may consider that certain infringements can be punished with a fine of a predetermined, fixed amount. The application of a fixed amount to certain types of infringements cannot hamper the application of the GDPR, in particular, Article 83 thereof. Moreover, applying fixed amounts does not relieve supervisory authorities from complying with cooperation and consistency (Chapter VII GDPR). 19. It is at the discretion of the supervisory authority to establish which types of infringements can be punished with a predetermined fixed amount , based on their nature, gravity and duration. The supervisory authority cannot make such a determination if this is prohibited or would otherwise conflict with the national law of the Member State. 20. Fixed amounts can be established at the discretion of the supervisory authority, taking into account – inter alia – the social and economic circumstances of that particular Member State, in relation to the seriousness of the infringement as construed by Article 83(2)(a), (b) and (g) GDPR. It is recommended that the supervisory authority communicates the amounts and circumstances for application beforehand. CHAPTER 3 – CONCURRENT INFRINGEMENTS AND THE APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 83(3) GDPR 21. Before being able to calculate a fine based on the methodology of these guidelines, it is important to first consider what conduct (factual circumstances regarding the behaviour) and infringements (abstract legal descriptions of what is sanctionable) the fine is based upon. Indeed, a particular case might include --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted circumstances that could either be considered as one and the same or separate sanctionable conducts. Also, it is possible that one and the same conduct could give rise to a number of different infringements where the attribution of one infringement precludes attribution of another infringement or can be attributed alongside each other. In other words, there can be cases of concurrent infringements. Depending on the rules of concurrences such can lead to different calculations of fines. 22. Examining the analysis of Member States’ traditions of rules on concurrences as outlined in CJEU case-law, 5 and considering the different scopes of application and legal consequences, these principles can be roughly grouped into the following three categories: - Concurrence of offences (Chapter 3.1.1), - Unity of action (Chapter 3.1.2), - Plurality of actions (Chapter 3.2). 23. These different categories of concurrences do not conflict with each other, but have different scopes of application and fit into place in a coherent overall system, providing for a logical testing scheme. 24. Therefore, it is important to first establish a. Whether or not the circumstances are to be considered as one (Chapter 3.1) or multiple sanctionable conducts (Chapter 3.2), b. In case of one conduct (Chapter 3.1), whether or not this conduct gives rise to one or more infringements, and c. In case of one conduct that gives rise to multiple infringements, attribution of one infringement precludes the attribution of another infringement (Chapter 3.1.1) or whether they are to be attributed alongside each other (Chapter 3.1.2). 5 In particular, see the in-depth analysis in the Opinion of AG Tanchev in case C-10/18 P, Marine Harvest. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted DIAGRAM --- PAGE 12 --- Adopted 3.1 - One sanctionable conduct 25. As a first step, it is essential to establish whether there is one and the same sanctionable conduct (“idem”) or there are multiple ones in order to identify the relevant sanctionable behaviour to be fined. Therefore, it is important to understand what circumstances are considered as one and the same conduct, as opposed to multiple conducts. The relevant sanctionable behaviour needs to be assessed and identified on a case-by- case basis. For example, in a certain case, “the same or linked processing operations” might constitute one and the same conduct. 26. The term “processing operation” is included in Article 4(2) GDPR, where “processing” is defined as “any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data or on sets of personal data, whether or not by automated means, such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or destruction.” 27. When assessing ”the same or linked processing operations”, it should be kept in mind that all obligations legally necessary for the processing operations to be lawfully carried out can be considered by the supervisory authority for its assessment of infringements, including for instance transparency obligations (e.g. Article 13 GDPR). This is also underlined by the phrase “for the same or linked processing operations”, which indicates that the scope of this provision includes any infringement that relates to and may have an impact on the same or linked processing operations. 28. The term “linked” refers to the principle that a unitary conduct might consist of several parts that are carried out by a unitary will and are contextually (in particular, regarding identity in terms of data subject, purpose and nature), spatially and temporally related in such a close way that, from an objective standpoint, they would be considered as one coherent conduct. A sufficient link should not be assumed easily, in order for the supervisory authority to avoid infringement of the principles of deterrence and effective enforcement of European law. Therefore, these aspects of relations for a sufficient link need to be assessed on a case-by- case basis. Example 1a – The same or linked processing operations A financial institution requests a credit check from a credit reporting agency (CRA). The financial institution receives this information and stores it in its system. Although the collection and storage of the creditworthiness data by the financial institution each are by themselves processing operations, they form a set of processing operations that are carried out by a unitary will and are contextually, spatially and temporally related in such a close way that, from an objective standpoint, they would be considered as one coherent conduct. Therefore, the processing operations performed by the financial institution are to be considered as being “linked” and form the same conduct. Example 1b – The same or linked processing operations A data broker decides to implement a new processing activity as follows: it decides to collect – as a third party – the consumer transaction history from dozens of retailers without a legal basis, to perform psychometric analysis to predict future behaviour of individuals, including political voting behaviour, willingness to quit their job and more. In the same decision, the data broker decides to not include this procedure in the records of processing activities, not to inform data subjects and to ignore any data subject --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted access requests related to the new processing operations. The processing operations involved in this processing activity form a set of processing operations that are carried out by a unitary will and are contextually, spatially and temporally related. They are to be considered as being “linked” and forming the same conduct. This also includes the failure to register the processing activity in the records, to inform data subjects and to establish procedures to give effect to the right of access with regard to the new processing operations. These obligations have been infringed for linked processing operations. Example 1c – Not the same or linked processing operations (i) A building authority performs a background check of a job applicant. The background check also includes the political affinity, union membership and sexual orientation. (ii) Five days later, the building authority demands from its vendors (sole traders) excessive self-disclosure regarding their business deals with other entities, irrespective of any relevance to the contract with or compliance obligations of the building authority. (iii) Another week later, the building authority suffers a personal data breach. The network of the building authority is hacked – despite having adequate technical and organisational measures in place – and the hacker gains access to a system that processes personal data of citizens that had filed requests with the building authority. Despite the data were adequately encrypted in line with applicable standards, the hacker is able to break it with military