quantification of the fine will depend on all the elements collected during the course of the investigation and on further considerations also linked to previous fining experiences of the supervisory authority. 72. For clarity, it should be noted that each criterion of Article 83(2) GDPR – whether it is assessed under Chapter 4 or this Chapter – should only be taken into account once as part of the overall assessment of Article 83(2) GDPR. 5.2 - Actions taken by controller or processor to mitigate damage suffered by data subjects 73. A first step in determining whether aggravating or mitigating circumstances have occurred, is to review Articles 83(2)(c), which concerns “any action taken by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects.” 74. As recalled in Guidelines WP253, data controllers and processors are already obliged to “implement technical and organisational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk, to carry out data protection impact assessments and mitigate risks arising from the processing of personal data to the rights and freedoms of the individuals.” However, in case of an infringement, the controller or processor should “do whatever they can do in order to reduce the consequences of the breach for the individual(s) concerned32. 75. The adoption of appropriate measures to mitigate the damage suffered by the data subjects may be considered a mitigating factor, decreasing the amount of the fine. 32 Guidelines WP253, p. 12. --- PAGE 27 --- Adopted 76. The measures adopted must be assessed, in particular, with regard to the element of timeliness, i.e. the time when they are implemented by the controller or processor, and their effectiveness. In that sense, measures spontaneously implemented prior to the commencement of the supervisory authority’s investigation becoming known to the controller or processor are more likely to be considered a mitigating factor, than measures that have been implemented after that moment. 5.3 - Degree of responsibility of the controller or processor 77. Following Article 83(2)(d), the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor will have to be assessed, taking into account measures implemented by them pursuant to Articles 25 and 32 GDPR. In line with Guidelines WP253, “the question that the supervisory authority must then answer is to what extent the controller ‘did what it could be expected to do’ given the nature, the purposes or the size of the processing, seen in light of the obligations imposed on them by the Regulation33”. 78. In particular, with regard to this criterion, the residual risk for the freedoms and rights of the data subjects, the impairment caused to the data subjects and the damage persisting after the adoption of the measures by the controller as well as the degree of robustness of the measures adopted pursuant to Articles 25 and 32 GDPR must be assessed. 79. In this respect, the supervisory authority may also consider whether the data in question was directly identifiable and/or available without technical protection. 34 However, it should be borne in mind that the existence of such protection does not necessarily constitute a mitigating factor (see paragraph 82 below). This depends on all the circumstances of the case. 80. In order to adequately assess the above elements, the supervisory authority should take into account any relevant documentation provided by the controller or processor, e.g. in the context of the exercise of their right of defence. In particular, such documentation could provide evidence of when the measures were taken and how they were implemented, whether there were interactions between the controller and the processor (if applicable), or whether there has been contact with the DPO or data subjects (if applicable). 81. Given the increased level of accountability under the GDPR in comparison with Directive 95/46/EC, 35 it is likely that the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor will be considered an aggravating or a neutral factor. Only in exceptional circumstances, where the controller or processor has gone above and beyond the obligations imposed upon them, will this be considered a mitigating factor. 5.4 - Previous infringements by the controller or processor 82. Previous infringements are infringements already established before the decision is issued. In case of cooperation under Chapter VII GDPR, prior infringements are those already established before the draft decision (in the sense of Article 60 GDPR) is issued. 83. According to Article 83(2)(e) GDPR, any relevant previous infringements committed by the controller or processor must be considered when deciding whether to impose an administrative fine and deciding on the amount of the administrative fine. Similar wording is found in Recital 148 GDPR. 33 Ibid, p. 13. 34 Ibid, p. 14-15. 35 Ibid, p. 13. --- PAGE 28 --- Adopted 5.4.1 - Time frame 84. Firstly, regard must be given to the point in time when the prior infringement took place, considering that the longer the time between a previous infringement and the infringement currently being investigated, the lower its significance. Consequently, the longer ago the infringement was committed, the less relevance shall be given by the supervisory authorities. This assessment is left at the discretion of the supervisory authority, subject to applicable national- and European law and principles. 85. However, since infringements committed a long time ago might still be of interest when assessing the “track record” of the controller or processor, fixed limitation periods are not to be set to this purpose. However, some national laws do prevent the supervisory authority from considering previous infringements after a settled period. Likewise, certain national laws impose a record deletion obligation after a certain period of time, which prevents the acting supervisory authorities from taking into account these precedents. 86. For the same reason, it should be noted that infringements of the GDPR, since they will be more recent, must be considered as more relevant than infringements of the national provisions adopted for the implementation of Directive 95/46/EC (if national laws allow such infringements to be taken into account by the supervisory authority). 5.4.2 - Subject matter 87. For the purpose of Article 83(2)(e) GDPR, previous infringements of either the same or different subject matter to the one being investigated might be considered as “relevant”. 88. Even though all prior infringements might provide an indication about the controller’s or processor’s general attitude towards the observance of the GDPR, infringements of the same subject matter must be given more significance, as they are closer to the infringement currently under investigation, especially when the controller or processor previously committed the same infringement (repeated infringements). Thus, same subject-matter infringements must be considered as more relevant than previous infringements concerning a different topic. 89. For example, the fact that the controller or the processor had failed in the past to respond to data subjects exercising their rights in a timely manner must be considered more relevant when the infringement being investigated refers also to a lack of response to a data subject exercising their rights than when it refers to a personal data breach. 90. However, due account must be taken of previous infringements of a different subject matter, but that were committed in the same manner, as they might be indicative of persisting problems within the controller or processor organisation. For example, this would be the case for infringements arising as a consequence of having ignored the advice provided by the Data Protection Officer. 5.4.3 - Other considerations 91. If considering a previous infringement of the national provisions adopted for the implementation of the Directive 95/46/EC, the supervisory authorities must take into account the fact that the requirements in the Directive and the GDPR might differ (if national laws allow such infringements to be taken into account by the supervisory authority). 92. When considering the relevance of a previous infringement, the supervisory authority should take account of the status of the procedure in which the previous infringement was established – particularly of any measures taken by the supervisory authority or by the judicial authority – in accordance with national law. --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted 93. Previous infringements could also be considered when they were found by a different supervisory authority concerning the same controller/processor. For example, the lead supervisory authority dealing with an infringement through the cooperation (one-stop-shop) mechanism in accordance with Article 60 GDPR could take into account infringements previously determined in local cases, by another supervisory authority, concerning the same controller/processor. Likewise, infringements previously determined by the lead supervisory authority could be taken into account when a different authority must handle a complaint lodged with it in cases with only local impacts under Article 56(2) GDPR. Where there is no lead supervisory authority (for example, in case the controller or processor is not established in the European Union), supervisory authorities could also take into account infringements previously determined by another supervisory authority concerning the same controller/processor. 94. The existence of previous infringements can be considered an aggravating factor in the calculation of the fine. The weight given to this factor is to be determined in view of the nature and