be adjusted based on the size of the undertaking. The undertaking has an annual turnover of €200 million and therefore falls within the range between €100 million and €250 million. This means that the starting amount will be adjusted to an amount between 15% and 50% of the starting amount. Considering that the higher the turnover of the undertaking is within its applicable tier, the higher the starting amount is likely to be, the supervisory authority decides that an adjustment down to 40% of the starting amount identified in step 1 is justified based on the size of the undertaking. The starting amount after the adjustment will then be€4 million in this case. To ensure that this starting amount is in line with the Guidelines, it is possible to cross-check this amount against the ranges included in the applicable table. Considering that Article 83(5) GDPR is applicable, the undertaking has a turnover between €100 million and €250 million and the level of seriousness is high, the starting amount should be between €600,000 and €10 million. The supervisory authority concludes that a starting amount of €4 million, falls within the range between €600,000 and €10 million. Therefore, the starting amount is in line with the Guidelines. After this, the supervisory authority proceeds with the calculation of the fine on the basis of the remainder of the Guidelines. Example B --- PAGE 48 --- Adopted A hotel chain with a turnover of €2 billion has infringed Article 12 GDPR. The supervisory authority, after analysing the circumstances of the case under Articles 83(2)(a), (b) and (g), decided that the infringement is of a medium level of seriousness. After this, the supervisory authority has to decide on the starting amount for further calculation. The supervisory authority first identifies that Article 12 GDPR is listed in Article 83(5)(b) GDPR. The turnover of the undertaking is €2 billion, which is more than €500 million and therefore the dynamic maximum applies. This means that the legal maximum is 4% of the annual turnover of the undertaking, which is €80 million. The level of seriousness is medium and, therefore, the starting amount should be considered between 10 and 20 % of the applicable legal maximum, i.e. 0.4% and 0.8% of the annual turnover, which equals to a starting amount between €8 million and €16 million. Considering that the more serious the infringement is within its own category, the higher the starting amount is likely to be, the supervisory authority considers that, due to the seriousness of the infringement, the starting amount should be €12 million, i.e. 15 % of the applicable legal maximum and 0.6% of the annual turnover of the undertaking. Since the undertaking has an annual turnover over €500 million and the dynamic legal maximum applies, the size of the undertaking is already reflected in the dynamic legal maximum used to determine the starting amount. As a result, no further adjustment is applied. After this, the supervisory authority proceeds with the calculation of the fine on the basis of the remainder of the Guidelines.