--- PAGE 141 --- ANNEX XI Technical documentation referred to in Article 53(1), point (a) — technical documentation for providers of general-purpose AI models Section 1 Information to be provided by all providers of general-purpose AI models The technical documentation referred to in Article 53(1), point (a) shall contain at least the following information as appropriate to the size and risk profile of the model: 1. A general description of the general-purpose AI model including: (a) the tasks that the model is intended to perform and the type and nature of AI systems in which it can be integrated; (b) the acceptable use policies applicable; (c) the date of release and methods of distribution; (d) the architecture and number of parameters; (e) the modality (e.g. text, image) and format of inputs and outputs; (f) the licence. 2. A detailed description of the elements of the model referred to in point 1, and relevant information of the process for the development, including the following elements: (a) the technical means (e.g. instructions of use, infrastructure, tools) required for the general-purpose AI model to be integrated in AI systems; (b) the design specifications of the model and training process, including training methodologies and techniques, the key design choices including the rationale and assumptions made; what the model is designed to optimise for and the relevance of the different parameters, as applicable; (c) information on the data used for training, testing and validation, where applicable, including the type and provenance of data and curation methodologies (e.g. cleaning, filtering, etc.), the number of data points, their scope and main characteristics; how the data was obtained and selected as well as all other measures to detect the unsuitability of data sources and methods to detect identifiable biases, where applicable; (d) the computational resources used to train the model (e.g. number of floating point operations), training time, and other relevant details related to the training; (e) known or estimated energy consumption of the model. With regard to point (e), where the energy consumption of the model is unknown, the energy consumption may be based on information about computational resources used. Section 2 Additional information to be provided by providers of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk 1. A detailed description of the evaluation strategies, including evaluation results, on the basis of available public evaluation protocols and tools or otherwise of other evaluation methodologies. Evaluation strategies shall include evaluation criteria, metrics and the methodology on the identification of limitations. 2. Where applicable, a detailed description of the measures put in place for the purpose of conducting internal and/or external adversarial testing (e.g. red teaming), model adaptations, including alignment and fine-tuning. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 141/144 --- PAGE 142 --- 3. Where applicable, a detailed description of the system architecture explaining how software components build or feed into each other and integrate into the overall processing. EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 142/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 143 --- ANNEX XII Transparency information referred to in Article 53(1), point (b) — technical documentation for providers of general-purpose AI models to downstream providers that integrate the model into their AI system The information referred to in Article 53(1), point (b) shall contain at least the following: 1. A general description of the general-purpose AI model including: (a) the tasks that the model is intended to perform and the type and nature of AI systems into which it can be integrated; (b) the acceptable use policies applicable; (c) the date of release and methods of distribution; (d) how the model interacts, or can be used to interact, with hardware or software that is not part of the model itself, where applicable; (e) the versions of relevant software related to the use of the general-purpose AI model, where applicable; (f) the architecture and number of parameters; (g) the modality (e.g. text, image) and format of inputs and outputs; (h) the licence for the model. 2. A description of the elements of the model and of the process for its development, including: (a) the technical means (e.g. instructions for use, infrastructure, tools) required for the general-purpose AI model to be integrated into AI systems; (b) the modality (e.g. text, image, etc.) and format of the inputs and outputs and their maximum size (e.g. context window length, etc.); (c) information on the data used for training, testing and validation, where applicable, including the type and provenance of data and curation methodologies. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 143/144 --- PAGE 144 --- ANNEX XIII Criteria for the designation of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk referred to in Article 51 For the purpose of determining that a general-purpose AI model has capabilities or an impact equivalent to those set out in Article 51(1), point (a), the Commission shall take into account the following criteria: (a) the number of parameters of the model; (b) the quality or size of the data set, for example measured through tokens; (c) the amount of computation used for training the model, measured in floating point operations or indicated by a combination of other variables such as estimated cost of training, estimated time required for the training, or estimated energy consumption for the training; (d) the input and output modalities of the model, such as text to text (large language models), text to image, multi-modality, and the state of the art thresholds for determining high-impact capabilities for each modality, and the specific type of inputs and outputs (e.g. biological sequences); (e) the benchmarks and evaluations of capabilities of the model, including considering the number of tasks without additional training, adaptability to learn new, distinct tasks, its level of autonomy and scalability, the tools it has access to; (f) whether it has a high impact on the internal market due to its reach, which shall be presumed when it has been made available to at least 10 000 registered business users established in the Union; (g) the number of registered end-users. EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 144/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj