quality of the system; the decisions about any possible trade-off made regarding the technical solutions adopted to comply with the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; (c) the description of the system architecture explaining how software components build on or feed into each other and integrate into the overall processing; the computational resources used to develop, train, test and validate the AI system; (d) where relevant, the data requirements in terms of datasheets describing the training methodologies and techniques and the training data sets used, including a general description of these data sets, information about their provenance, scope and main characteristics; how the data was obtained and selected; labelling procedures (e.g. for supervised learning), data cleaning methodologies (e.g. outliers detection); (e) assessment of the human oversight measures needed in accordance with Article 14, including an assessment of the technical measures needed to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of AI systems by the deployers, in accordance with Article 13(3), point (d); (f) where applicable, a detailed description of pre-determined changes to the AI system and its performance, together with all the relevant information related to the technical solutions adopted to ensure continuous compliance of the AI system with the relevant requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; (g) the validation and testing procedures used, including information about the validation and testing data used and their main characteristics; metrics used to measure accuracy, robustness and compliance with other relevant requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, as well as potentially discriminatory impacts; test logs and all test reports dated and signed by the responsible persons, including with regard to pre-determined changes as referred to under point (f); EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 130/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 131 --- (h) cybersecurity measures put in place; 3. Detailed information about the monitoring, functioning and control of the AI system, in particular with regard to: its capabilities and limitations in performance, including the degrees of accuracy for specific persons or groups of persons on which the system is intended to be used and the overall expected level of accuracy in relation to its intended purpose; the foreseeable unintended outcomes and sources of risks to health and safety, fundamental rights and discrimination in view of the intended purpose of the AI system; the human oversight measures needed in accordance with Article 14, including the technical measures put in place to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of AI systems by the deployers; specifications on input data, as appropriate; 4. A description of the appropriateness of the performance metrics for the specific AI system; 5. A detailed description of the risk management system in accordance with Article 9; 6. A description of relevant changes made by the provider to the system through its lifecycle; 7. A list of the harmonised standards applied in full or in part the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union; where no such harmonised standards have been applied, a detailed description of the solutions adopted to meet the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2, including a list of other relevant standards and technical specifications applied; 8. A copy of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47; 9. A detailed description of the system in place to evaluate the AI system performance in the post-market phase in accordance with Article 72, including the post-market monitoring plan referred to in Article 72(3). OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 131/144 --- PAGE 132 --- ANNEX V EU declaration of conformity The EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47, shall contain all of the following information: 1. AI system name and type and any additional unambiguous reference allowing the identification and traceability of the AI system; 2. The name and address of the provider or, where applicable, of their authorised representative; 3. A statement that the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47 is issued under the sole responsibility of the provider; 4. A statement that the AI system is in conformity with this Regulation and, if applicable, with any other relevant Union law that provides for the issuing of the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 47; 5. Where an AI system involves the processing of personal data, a statement that that AI system complies with Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and (EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680; 6. References to any relevant harmonised standards used or any other common specification in relation to which conformity is declared; 7. Where applicable, the name and identification number of the notified body, a description of the conformity assessment procedure performed, and identification of the certificate issued; 8. The place and date of issue of the declaration, the name and function of the person who signed it, as well as an indication for, or on behalf of whom, that person signed, a signature. EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 132/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 133 --- ANNEX VI Conformity assessment procedure based on internal control 1. The conformity assessment procedure based on internal control is the conformity assessment procedure based on points 2, 3 and 4. 2. The provider verifies that the established quality management system is in compliance with the requirements of Article 17. 3. The provider examines the information contained in the technical documentation in order to assess the compliance of the AI system with the relevant essential requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2. 4. The provider also verifies that the design and development process of the AI system and its post-market monitoring as referred to in Article 72 is consistent with the technical documentation. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 133/144 --- PAGE 134 --- ANNEX VII Conformity based on an assessment of the quality management system and an assessment of the technical documentation 1. Introduction Conformity based on an assessment of the quality management system and an assessment of the technical documentation is the conformity assessment procedure based on points 2 to 5. 2. Overview The approved quality management system for the design, development and testing of AI systems pursuant to Article 17 shall be examined in accordance with point 3 and shall be subject to surveillance as specified in point 5. The technical documentation of the AI system shall be examined in accordance with point 4. 3. Quality management system 3.1. The application of the provider shall include: (a) the name and address of the provider and, if the application is lodged by an authorised representative, also their name and address; (b) the list of AI systems covered under the same quality management system; (c) the technical documentation for each AI system covered under the same quality management system; (d) the documentation concerning the quality management system which shall cover all the aspects listed under Article 17; (e) a description of the procedures in place to ensure that the quality management system remains adequate and effective; (f) a written declaration that the same application has not been lodged with any other notified body. 3.2. The quality management system shall be assessed by the notified body, which shall determine whether it satisfies the requirements referred to in Article 17. The decision shall be notified to the provider or its authorised representative. The notification shall contain the conclusions of the assessment of the quality management system and the reasoned assessment decision. 3.3. The quality management system as approved shall continue to be implemented and maintained by the provider so that it remains adequate and efficient. 3.4. Any intended change to the approved quality management system or the list of AI systems covered by the latter shall be brought to the attention of the notified body by the provider. The proposed changes shall be examined by the notified body, which shall decide whether the modified quality management system continues to satisfy the requirements referred to in point 3.2 or whether a reassessment is necessary. The notified body shall notify the provider of its decision. The notification shall contain the conclusions of the examination of the changes and the reasoned assessment decision. 4. Control of the technical documentation. 4.1. In addition to the application referred to in point 3, an application with a notified body of their choice shall be lodged by the provider for the assessment of the technical documentation relating to the AI system which the provider intends to place on the market or put into service and which is covered by the quality management system referred to under point 3. 4.2. The application shall include: (a) the name and address of the provider; (b) a written declaration that the same application has not been lodged with any other notified body; (c) the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV. EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 134/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 135 --- 4.3. The technical documentation shall be examined by the notified body. Where relevant, and limited to what is necessary to fulfil its tasks, the notified body shall be granted full access to the