for the fulfilment of the tasks of the scientific panel under Article 68(2). OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 111/144 --- PAGE 112 --- 4. The request for information shall state the legal basis and the purpose of the request, specify what information is required, set a period within which the information is to be provided, and indicate the fines provided for in Article 101 for supplying incorrect, incomplete or misleading information. 5. The provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned, or its representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall supply the information requested on behalf of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned. Lawyers duly authorised to act may supply information on behalf of their clients. The clients shall nevertheless remain fully responsible if the information supplied is incomplete, incorrect or misleading. Article 92 Power to conduct evaluations 1. The AI Office, after consulting the Board, may conduct evaluations of the general-purpose AI model concerned: (a) to assess compliance of the provider with obligations under this Regulation, where the information gathered pursuant to Article 91 is insufficient; or (b) to investigate systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk, in particular following a qualified alert from the scientific panel in accordance with Article 90(1), point (a). 2. The Commission may decide to appoint independent experts to carry out evaluations on its behalf, including from the scientific panel established pursuant to Article 68. Independent experts appointed for this task shall meet the criteria outlined in Article 68(2). 3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Commission may request access to the general-purpose AI model concerned through APIs or further appropriate technical means and tools, including source code. 4. The request for access shall state the legal basis, the purpose and reasons of the request and set the period within which the access is to be provided, and the fines provided for in Article 101 for failure to provide access. 5. The providers of the general-purpose AI model concerned or its representative shall supply the information requested. In the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or where the provider has no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their statutes, shall provide the access requested on behalf of the provider of the general-purpose AI model concerned. 6. The Commission shall adopt implementing acts setting out the detailed arrangements and the conditions for the evaluations, including the detailed arrangements for involving independent experts, and the procedure for the selection thereof. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2). 7. Prior to requesting access to the general-purpose AI model concerned, the AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model to gather more information on the internal testing of the model, internal safeguards for preventing systemic risks, and other internal procedures and measures the provider has taken to mitigate such risks. Article 93 Power to request measures 1. Where necessary and appropriate, the Commission may request providers to: (a) take appropriate measures to comply with the obligations set out in Articles 53 and 54; EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 112/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 113 --- (b) implement mitigation measures, where the evaluation carried out in accordance with Article 92 has given rise to serious and substantiated concern of a systemic risk at Union level; (c) restrict the making available on the market, withdraw or recall the model. 2. Before a measure is requested, the AI Office may initiate a structured dialogue with the provider of the general-purpose AI model. 3. If, during the structured dialogue referred to in paragraph 2, the provider of the general-purpose AI model with systemic risk offers commitments to implement mitigation measures to address a systemic risk at Union level, the Commission may, by decision, make those commitments binding and declare that there are no further grounds for action. Article 94 Procedural rights of economic operators of the general-purpose AI model Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the providers of the general-purpose AI model, without prejudice to more specific procedural rights provided for in this Regulation. CHAPTER X CODES OF CONDUCT AND GUIDELINES Article 95 Codes of conduct for voluntary application of specific requirements 1. The AI Office and the Member States shall encourage and facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct, including related governance mechanisms, intended to foster the voluntary application to AI systems, other than high-risk AI systems, of some or all of the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2 taking into account the available technical solutions and industry best practices allowing for the application of such requirements. 2. The AI Office and the Member States shall facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct concerning the voluntary application, including by deployers, of specific requirements to all AI systems, on the basis of clear objectives and key performance indicators to measure the achievement of those objectives, including elements such as, but not limited to: (a) applicable elements provided for in Union ethical guidelines for trustworthy AI; (b) assessing and minimising the impact of AI systems on environmental sustainability, including as regards energy-efficient programming and techniques for the efficient design, training and use of AI; (c) promoting AI literacy, in particular that of persons dealing with the development, operation and use of AI; (d) facilitating an inclusive and diverse design of AI systems, including through the establishment of inclusive and diverse development teams and the promotion of stakeholders’ participation in that process; (e) assessing and preventing the negative impact of AI systems on vulnerable persons or groups of vulnerable persons, including as regards accessibility for persons with a disability, as well as on gender equality. 3. Codes of conduct may be drawn up by individual providers or deployers of AI systems or by organisations representing them or by both, including with the involvement of any interested stakeholders and their representative organisations, including civil society organisations and academia. Codes of conduct may cover one or more AI systems taking into account the similarity of the intended purpose of the relevant systems. 4. The AI Office and the Member States shall take into account the specific interests and needs of SMEs, including start-ups, when encouraging and facilitating the drawing up of codes of conduct. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 113/144 --- PAGE 114 --- Article 96 Guidelines from the Commission on the implementation of this Regulation 1. The Commission shall develop guidelines on the practical implementation of this Regulation, and in particular on: (a) the application of the requirements and obligations referred to in Articles 8 to 15 and in Article 25; (b) the prohibited practices referred to in Article 5; (c) the practical implementation of the provisions related to substantial modification; (d) the practical implementation of transparency obligations laid down in Article 50; (e) detailed information on the relationship of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I, as well as with other relevant Union law, including as regards consistency in their enforcement; (f) the application of the definition of an AI system as set out in Article 3, point (1). When issuing such guidelines, the Commission shall pay particular attention to the needs of SMEs including start-ups, of local public authorities and of the sectors most likely to be affected by this Regulation. The guidelines referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph shall take due account of the generally acknowledged state of the art on AI, as well as of relevant harmonised standards and common specifications that are referred to in Articles 40 and 41, or of those harmonised standards or technical specifications that are set out pursuant to Union harmonisation law. 2. At the request of the Member States or the AI Office, or on its own initiative, the Commission shall update guidelines previously adopted when deemed necessary. CHAPTER XI DELEGATION OF POWER AND COMMITTEE PROCEDURE Article 97 Exercise of the delegation 1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 6(6) and (7), Article 7(1) and (3), Article 11(3), Article 43(5) and (6), Article 47(5), Article 51(3), Article 52(4) and Article 53(5) and (6) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 1 August 2024. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period. 3. The delegation