the product or the standalone AI system from that market or to recall it. That authority shall without undue delay notify the Commission and the other Member States of those measures. 6. The notification referred to in paragraph 5 shall include all available details, in particular the information necessary for the identification of the non-compliant AI system, the origin of the AI system and the supply chain, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to one or more of the following: (a) non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5; (b) a failure of a high-risk AI system to meet requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; (c) shortcomings in the harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 conferring a presumption of conformity; (d) non-compliance with Article 50. 7. The market surveillance authorities other than the market surveillance authority of the Member State initiating the procedure shall, without undue delay, inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the AI system concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections. 8. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 5 of this Article, no objection has been raised by either a market surveillance authority of a Member State or by the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a market surveillance authority of another Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified. This shall be without prejudice to the procedural rights of the concerned operator in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The three-month period referred to in this paragraph shall be reduced to 30 days in the event of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5 of this Regulation. 9. The market surveillance authorities shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the product or the AI system concerned, such as withdrawal of the product or the AI system from their market, without undue delay. Article 80 Procedure for dealing with AI systems classified by the provider as non-high-risk in application of Annex III 1. Where a market surveillance authority has sufficient reason to consider that an AI system classified by the provider as non-high-risk pursuant to Article 6(3) is indeed high-risk, the market surveillance authority shall carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned in respect of its classification as a high-risk AI system based on the conditions set out in Article 6(3) and the Commission guidelines. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 107/144 --- PAGE 108 --- 2. Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority finds that the AI system concerned is high-risk, it shall without undue delay require the relevant provider to take all necessary actions to bring the AI system into compliance with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, as well as take appropriate corrective action within a period the market surveillance authority may prescribe. 3. Where the market surveillance authority considers that the use of the AI system concerned is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform the Commission and the other Member States without undue delay of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the provider to take. 4. The provider shall ensure that all necessary action is taken to bring the AI system into compliance with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation. Where the provider of an AI system concerned does not bring the AI system into compliance with those requirements and obligations within the period referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, the provider shall be subject to fines in accordance with Article 99. 5. The provider shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the Union market. 6. Where the provider of the AI system concerned does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, Article 79(5) to (9) shall apply. 7. Where, in the course of the evaluation pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, the market surveillance authority establishes that the AI system was misclassified by the provider as non-high-risk in order to circumvent the application of requirements in Chapter III, Section 2, the provider shall be subject to fines in accordance with Article 99. 8. In exercising their power to monitor the application of this Article, and in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, market surveillance authorities may perform appropriate checks, taking into account in particular information stored in the EU database referred to in Article 71 of this Regulation. Article 81 Union safeguard procedure 1. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in Article 79(5), or within 30 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5, objections are raised by the market surveillance authority of a Member State to a measure taken by another market surveillance authority, or where the Commission considers the measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the market surveillance authority of the relevant Member State and the operator or operators, and shall evaluate the national measure. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall, within six months, or within 60 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5, starting from the notification referred to in Article 79(5), decide whether the national measure is justified and shall notify its decision to the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned. The Commission shall also inform all other market surveillance authorities of its decision. 2. Where the Commission considers the measure taken by the relevant Member State to be justified, all Member States shall ensure that they take appropriate restrictive measures in respect of the AI system concerned, such as requiring the withdrawal of the AI system from their market without undue delay, and shall inform the Commission accordingly. Where the Commission considers the national measure to be unjustified, the Member State concerned shall withdraw the measure and shall inform the Commission accordingly. 3. Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the AI system is attributed to shortcomings in the harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 of this Regulation, the Commission shall apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012. Article 82 Compliant AI systems which present a risk 1. Where, having performed an evaluation under Article 79, after consulting the relevant national public authority referred to in Article 77(1), the market surveillance authority of a Member State finds that although a high-risk AI system complies with this Regulation, it nevertheless presents a risk to the health or safety of persons, to fundamental rights, or to other aspects of public interest protection, it shall require the relevant operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the AI system concerned, when placed on the market or put into service, no longer presents that risk without undue delay, within a period it may prescribe. EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 108/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 109 --- 2. The provider or other relevant operator shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the Union market within the timeline prescribed by the market surveillance authority of the Member State referred to in paragraph 1. 3. The Member States shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States of a finding under paragraph 1. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the AI system concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the AI system, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken. 4. The Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the Member States concerned and the relevant operators, and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide whether the measure is justified and, where necessary, propose other appropriate measures. 5. The Commission shall immediately communicate its decision to the Member States concerned and to the relevant operators. It shall also inform the other Member States. Article 83 Formal non-compliance 1. Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State makes one of the following findings, it shall require the