referred to in Article 46, the functioning of AI regulatory sandboxes, and testing in real world conditions referred to in Articles 57, 59 and 60; (e) at the request of the Commission or on its own initiative, issue recommendations and written opinions on any relevant matters related to the implementation of this Regulation and to its consistent and effective application, including: (i) on the development and application of codes of conduct and codes of practice pursuant to this Regulation, as well as of the Commission’s guidelines; (ii) the evaluation and review of this Regulation pursuant to Article 112, including as regards the serious incident reports referred to in Article 73, and the functioning of the EU database referred to in Article 71, the preparation of the delegated or implementing acts, and as regards possible alignments of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I; (iii) on technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 96/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 97 --- (iv) on the use of harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41; (v) trends, such as European global competitiveness in AI, the uptake of AI in the Union, and the development of digital skills; (vi) trends on the evolving typology of AI value chains, in particular on the resulting implications in terms of accountability; (vii) on the potential need for amendment to Annex III in accordance with Article 7, and on the potential need for possible revision of Article 5 pursuant to Article 112, taking into account relevant available evidence and the latest developments in technology; (f) support the Commission in promoting AI literacy, public awareness and understanding of the benefits, risks, safeguards and rights and obligations in relation to the use of AI systems; (g) facilitate the development of common criteria and a shared understanding among market operators and competent authorities of the relevant concepts provided for in this Regulation, including by contributing to the development of benchmarks; (h) cooperate, as appropriate, with other Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, as well as relevant Union expert groups and networks, in particular in the fields of product safety, cybersecurity, competition, digital and media services, financial services, consumer protection, data and fundamental rights protection; (i) contribute to effective cooperation with the competent authorities of third countries and with international organisations; (j) assist national competent authorities and the Commission in developing the organisational and technical expertise required for the implementation of this Regulation, including by contributing to the assessment of training needs for staff of Member States involved in implementing this Regulation; (k) assist the AI Office in supporting national competent authorities in the establishment and development of AI regulatory sandboxes, and facilitate cooperation and information-sharing among AI regulatory sandboxes; (l) contribute to, and provide relevant advice on, the development of guidance documents; (m) advise the Commission in relation to international matters on AI; (n) provide opinions to the Commission on the qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models; (o) receive opinions by the Member States on qualified alerts regarding general-purpose AI models, and on national experiences and practices on the monitoring and enforcement of AI systems, in particular systems integrating the general-purpose AI models. Article 67 Advisory forum 1. An advisory forum shall be established to provide technical expertise and advise the Board and the Commission, and to contribute to their tasks under this Regulation. 2. The membership of the advisory forum shall represent a balanced selection of stakeholders, including industry, start-ups, SMEs, civil society and academia. The membership of the advisory forum shall be balanced with regard to commercial and non-commercial interests and, within the category of commercial interests, with regard to SMEs and other undertakings. 3. The Commission shall appoint the members of the advisory forum, in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph 2, from amongst stakeholders with recognised expertise in the field of AI. OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 97/144 --- PAGE 98 --- 4. The term of office of the members of the advisory forum shall be two years, which may be extended by up to no more than four years. 5. The Fundamental Rights Agency, ENISA, the European Committee for Standardization (CEN), the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC), and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) shall be permanent members of the advisory forum. 6. The advisory forum shall draw up its rules of procedure. It shall elect two co-chairs from among its members, in accordance with criteria set out in paragraph 2. The term of office of the co-chairs shall be two years, renewable once. 7. The advisory forum shall hold meetings at least twice a year. The advisory forum may invite experts and other stakeholders to its meetings. 8. The advisory forum may prepare opinions, recommendations and written contributions at the request of the Board or the Commission. 9. The advisory forum may establish standing or temporary sub-groups as appropriate for the purpose of examining specific questions related to the objectives of this Regulation. 10. The advisory forum shall prepare an annual report on its activities. That report shall be made publicly available. Article 68 Scientific panel of independent experts 1. The Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, make provisions on the establishment of a scientific panel of independent experts (the ‘scientific panel’) intended to support the enforcement activities under this Regulation. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 98(2). 2. The scientific panel shall consist of experts selected by the Commission on the basis of up-to-date scientific or technical expertise in the field of AI necessary for the tasks set out in paragraph 3, and shall be able to demonstrate meeting all of the following conditions: (a) having particular expertise and competence and scientific or technical expertise in the field of AI; (b) independence from any provider of AI systems or general-purpose AI models; (c) an ability to carry out activities diligently, accurately and objectively. The Commission, in consultation with the Board, shall determine the number of experts on the panel in accordance with the required needs and shall ensure fair gender and geographical representation. 3. The scientific panel shall advise and support the AI Office, in particular with regard to the following tasks: (a) supporting the implementation and enforcement of this Regulation as regards general-purpose AI models and systems, in particular by: (i) alerting the AI Office of possible systemic risks at Union level of general-purpose AI models, in accordance with Article 90; (ii) contributing to the development of tools and methodologies for evaluating capabilities of general-purpose AI models and systems, including through benchmarks; (iii) providing advice on the classification of general-purpose AI models with systemic risk; (iv) providing advice on the classification of various general-purpose AI models and systems; EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 98/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 99 --- (v) contributing to the development of tools and templates; (b) supporting the work of market surveillance authorities, at their request; (c) supporting cross-border market surveillance activities as referred to in Article 74(11), without prejudice to the powers of market surveillance authorities; (d) supporting the AI Office in carrying out its duties in the context of the Union safeguard procedure pursuant to Article 81. 4. The experts on the scientific panel shall perform their tasks with impartiality and objectivity, and shall ensure the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities. They shall neither seek nor take instructions from anyone when exercising their tasks under paragraph 3. Each expert shall draw up a declaration of interests, which shall be made publicly available. The AI Office shall establish systems and procedures to actively manage and prevent potential conflicts of interest. 5. The implementing act referred to in paragraph 1 shall include provisions on the conditions, procedures and detailed arrangements for the scientific panel and its members to issue alerts, and to request the assistance of the AI Office for the performance of the tasks of the scientific panel. Article 69 Access to the pool of experts by the Member States 1. Member States may call upon experts of the scientific panel to support their enforcement activities under this Regulation. 2. The Member States may be required to pay fees for the advice and support provided by the experts. The structure and the level of fees as well as the scale and structure of recoverable costs shall be set out in the implementing act referred to in Article 68(1), taking into account the objectives of the adequate implementation of this Regulation, cost-effectiveness and the necessity of ensuring effective access to experts for all Member States. 3. The Commission shall facilitate timely access to the experts by the Member States, as needed, and ensure that the combination of support activities carried out by Union AI testing support pursuant to Article 84 and experts pursuant to this Article is efficiently organised and provides the best possible added value.