been duly informed with concise, clear, relevant, and understandable information regarding: (a) the nature and objectives of the testing in real world conditions and the possible inconvenience that may be linked to their participation; (b) the conditions under which the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted, including the expected duration of the subject or subjects’ participation; (c) their rights, and the guarantees regarding their participation, in particular their right to refuse to participate in, and the right to withdraw from, testing in real world conditions at any time without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification; (d) the arrangements for requesting the reversal or the disregarding of the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system; (e) the Union-wide unique single identification number of the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Article 60(4) point (c), and the contact details of the provider or its legal representative from whom further information can be obtained. 2. The informed consent shall be dated and documented and a copy shall be given to the subjects of testing or their legal representative. Article 62 Measures for providers and deployers, in particular SMEs, including start-ups 1. Member States shall undertake the following actions: (a) provide SMEs, including start-ups, having a registered office or a branch in the Union, with priority access to the AI regulatory sandboxes, to the extent that they fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria; the priority access shall not preclude other SMEs, including start-ups, other than those referred to in this paragraph from access to the AI regulatory sandbox, provided that they also fulfil the eligibility conditions and selection criteria; (b) organise specific awareness raising and training activities on the application of this Regulation tailored to the needs of SMEs including start-ups, deployers and, as appropriate, local public authorities; (c) utilise existing dedicated channels and where appropriate, establish new ones for communication with SMEs including start-ups, deployers, other innovators and, as appropriate, local public authorities to provide advice and respond to queries about the implementation of this Regulation, including as regards participation in AI regulatory sandboxes; (d) facilitate the participation of SMEs and other relevant stakeholders in the standardisation development process. 2. The specific interests and needs of the SME providers, including start-ups, shall be taken into account when setting the fees for conformity assessment under Article 43, reducing those fees proportionately to their size, market size and other relevant indicators. 3. The AI Office shall undertake the following actions: (a) provide standardised templates for areas covered by this Regulation, as specified by the Board in its request; (b) develop and maintain a single information platform providing easy to use information in relation to this Regulation for all operators across the Union; EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 94/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 95 --- (c) organise appropriate communication campaigns to raise awareness about the obligations arising from this Regulation; (d) evaluate and promote the convergence of best practices in public procurement procedures in relation to AI systems. Article 63 Derogations for specific operators 1. Microenterprises within the meaning of Recommendation 2003/361/EC may comply with certain elements of the quality management system required by Article 17 of this Regulation in a simplified manner, provided that they do not have partner enterprises or linked enterprises within the meaning of that Recommendation. For that purpose, the Commission shall develop guidelines on the elements of the quality management system which may be complied with in a simplified manner considering the needs of microenterprises, without affecting the level of protection or the need for compliance with the requirements in respect of high-risk AI systems. 2. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be interpreted as exempting those operators from fulfilling any other requirements or obligations laid down in this Regulation, including those established in Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 72 and 73. CHAPTER VII GOVERNANCE SECTION 1 Governance at Union level Article 64 AI Office 1. The Commission shall develop Union expertise and capabilities in the field of AI through the AI Office. 2. Member States shall facilitate the tasks entrusted to the AI Office, as reflected in this Regulation. Article 65 Establishment and structure of the European Artificial Intelligence Board 1. A European Artificial Intelligence Board (the ‘Board’) is hereby established. 2. The Board shall be composed of one representative per Member State. The European Data Protection Supervisor shall participate as observer. The AI Office shall also attend the Board’s meetings, without taking part in the votes. Other national and Union authorities, bodies or experts may be invited to the meetings by the Board on a case by case basis, where the issues discussed are of relevance for them. 3. Each representative shall be designated by their Member State for a period of three years, renewable once. 4. Member States shall ensure that their representatives on the Board: (a) have the relevant competences and powers in their Member State so as to contribute actively to the achievement of the Board’s tasks referred to in Article 66; (b) are designated as a single contact point vis-à-vis the Board and, where appropriate, taking into account Member States’ needs, as a single contact point for stakeholders; OJ L, 12.7.2024 EN ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 95/144 --- PAGE 96 --- (c) are empowered to facilitate consistency and coordination between national competent authorities in their Member State as regards the implementation of this Regulation, including through the collection of relevant data and information for the purpose of fulfilling their tasks on the Board. 5. The designated representatives of the Member States shall adopt the Board’s rules of procedure by a two-thirds majority. The rules of procedure shall, in particular, lay down procedures for the selection process, the duration of the mandate of, and specifications of the tasks of, the Chair, detailed arrangements for voting, and the organisation of the Board’s activities and those of its sub-groups. 6. The Board shall establish two standing sub-groups to provide a platform for cooperation and exchange among market surveillance authorities and notifying authorities about issues related to market surveillance and notified bodies respectively. The standing sub-group for market surveillance should act as the administrative cooperation group (ADCO) for this Regulation within the meaning of Article 30 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The Board may establish other standing or temporary sub-groups as appropriate for the purpose of examining specific issues. Where appropriate, representatives of the advisory forum referred to in Article 67 may be invited to such sub-groups or to specific meetings of those subgroups as observers. 7. The Board shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the objectivity and impartiality of its activities. 8. The Board shall be chaired by one of the representatives of the Member States. The AI Office shall provide the secretariat for the Board, convene the meetings upon request of the Chair, and prepare the agenda in accordance with the tasks of the Board pursuant to this Regulation and its rules of procedure. Article 66 Tasks of the Board The Board shall advise and assist the Commission and the Member States in order to facilitate the consistent and effective application of this Regulation. To that end, the Board may in particular: (a) contribute to the coordination among national competent authorities responsible for the application of this Regulation and, in cooperation with and subject to the agreement of the market surveillance authorities concerned, support joint activities of market surveillance authorities referred to in Article 74(11); (b) collect and share technical and regulatory expertise and best practices among Member States; (c) provide advice on the implementation of this Regulation, in particular as regards the enforcement of rules on general-purpose AI models; (d) contribute to the harmonisation of administrative practices in the Member States, including in relation to the derogation from the conformity assessment procedures referred to in Article 46, the functioning of AI regulatory sandboxes, and testing in real world conditions referred to in Articles 57, 59 and 60; (e) at the request of the Commission or on its own initiative, issue recommendations and written opinions on any relevant matters related to the implementation of this Regulation and to its consistent and effective application, including: (i) on the development and application of codes of conduct and codes of practice pursuant to this Regulation, as well as of the Commission’s guidelines; (ii) the evaluation and review of this Regulation pursuant to Article 112, including as regards the serious incident reports referred to in Article 73, and the functioning of the EU database referred to in Article 71, the preparation of the delegated or implementing acts, and as regards possible alignments of this Regulation with the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex I; (iii) on technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements set out in Chapter III, Section 2; EN OJ L, 12.7.2024 96/144 ELI: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj --- PAGE 97 --- (iv) on the use of harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41; (v) trends, such as European global competitiveness in