specific obligations, the processor has, first, a duty to assist the controller in meeting the obligation to adopt adequate technical and organisational measures to ensure security of processing.57 While this may overlap, to some extent, with the requirement that the processor itself adopts adequate security measures, where the processing operations of the processor fall within the scope of the GDPR, they remain two distinct obligations, since one refers to the processor’s own measures and the other refers to the controller’s. 136. Secondly, the processor must assist the controller in meeting the obligation to notify personal data breaches to the supervisory authority and to data subjects. The processor must notify the controller whenever it discovers a personal data breach affecting the processor’s or a sub-processor’s facilities / IT systems and help the controller in obtaining the information that need to be stated in the report to the supervisory authority.58 The GDPR requires that the controller notify a breach without undue delay in order to minimize the harm for individuals and to maximize the possibility to address the breach in an adequate manner. Thus, the processor’s notification to the data controller should also take place without undue delay.59 Depending on the specific features of the processing entrusted to the processor, it may be appropriate for the parties to include in the contract a specific timeframe (e.g. number of hours) by which the processor should notify the controller, as well as the point of contact for such notifications, the modality and the minimum content expected by the controller.60 The contractual arrangement between the controller and the processor may also include an authorisation and a requirement for the processor to directly notify a data breach in accordance with Articles 33 and 34, but the legal responsibility for the notification remains with the controller.61 If the processor does notify a data breach directly to the supervisory authority, and inform data subjects in accordance with Article 33 and 34, the processor must also inform the controller and provide the controller with copies of the notification and information to data subjects. 137. Furthermore, the processor must also assist the controller in carrying out data protection impact assessments when required, and in consulting the supervisory authority when the outcome reveals that there is a high risk that cannot be mitigated. 138. The duty of assistance does not consist in a shift of responsibility, as those obligations are imposed on the controller. For instance, although the data protection impact assessment can in practice be carried out by a processor, the controller remains accountable for the duty to carry out the assessment62 and the processor is only required to assist the controller “where necessary and upon request.”63 As a result, the controller is the one that must take the initiative to perform the data protection impact assessment, not the processor. 57 Article 32 GDPR. 58 Article 33(3) GDPR. 59 For more information, see the Guidelines on Personal data breach notification under Regulation 2016/679, WP250rev.01, 6 February 2018, p. 13-14. 60 See also EDPB Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), 9 July 2019, at paragraph 40. 61 Guidelines on Personal data breach notification under Regulation 2016/679, WP250rev.01, 6 February 2018, p. 14. 62 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, WP 248 rev.01, p. 14 63 Recital 95 GDPR. --- PAGE 40 --- Adopted - After public consultation 1.3.7 On termination of the processing activities, the processor must, at the choice of the controller, delete or return all the personal data to the controller and delete existing copies (Art. 28(3)(g) GDPR). 139. The contractual terms are meant to ensure that the personal data are subject to appropriate protection after the end of the “provision of services related to the processing”: it is therefore up to the controller to decide what the processor should do with regard to the personal data. 140. The controller can decide at the beginning whether personal data shall be deleted or returned by specifying it in the contract, through a written communication to be timely sent to the processor. The contract or other legal act should reflect the possibility for the data controller to change the choice made before the end of the provision of services related to the processing. The contract should specify the process for providing such instructions. 141. If the controller chooses that the personal data be deleted, the processor should ensure that the deletion is performed in a secure manner, also in order to comply with Article 32 GDPR. The processor should confirm to the controller that the deletion has been completed within an agreed timescale and in an agreed manner. 142. The processor must delete all existing copies of the data, unless EU or Member State law requires further storage. If the processor or controller is aware of any such legal requirement, it should inform the other party as soon as possible. 1.3.8 The processor must make available to the controller all information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the obligations laid down in Article 28 and allow for and contribute to audits, including inspections, conducted by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller (Art. 28(3)(h) GDPR). 143. The contract shall include details on how often and how the flow of information between the processor and the controller should take place so that the controller is fully informed as to the details of the processing that are relevant to demonstrate compliance with the obligations laid down in Article 28 GDPR. For instance, the relevant portions of the processor’s records of processing activities may be shared with the controller. The processor should provide all information on how the processing activity will be carried out on behalf of the controller. Such information should include information on the functioning of the systems used, security measures, how the data retention requirements are met, data location, transfers of data, who has access to data and who are the recipients of data, sub- processors used, etc. 144. Further details shall also be set out in the contract regarding the ability to carry out and the duty to contribute to inspections and audits by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller. The GDPR specifies the inspections and audits are carried out by the controller or by a third party mandated by the controller. The goal of such audit is ensuring that the controller has all information concerning the processing activity performed on its behalf and the guarantees provided by the processor. The processor may suggest the choice of a specific auditor, but the final decision has to be left to the controller according to Article 28(3)(h) of the GDPR.64 Additionally, even where the 64 See EDPB-EDPS Joint Opinion 1/2021 on standard contractual clauses between controllers and processors, paragraph 43. --- PAGE 41 --- Adopted - After public consultation inspection is performed by an auditor proposed by the processor, the controller retains the right to contest the scope, methodology and results of the inspection.65 The parties should cooperate in good faith and assess whether and when there is a need to perform audits on the processor’s premises,, as well as which type of audit or inspection (remote / on-site / other way to gather the necessary information) would be needed and appropriate in the specific case also taking into account security concerns; the final choice on this is to be taken by the controller. Following the results of the inspection, the controller should be able to request the processor to take subsequent measures, e.g. to remedy shortcomings and gaps identified.66 Likewise, specific procedures should be established regarding the processor’s and the controller’s inspection of sub- processors (see sub-section 1.6 below67). 145. The issue of the allocation of costs between a controller and a processor concerning audits is not covered by the GDPR and is subject to commercial considerations. However, Article 28 (3)(h) requires that the contract include an obligation for the processor to make available all information necessary to the controller and an obligation to allow for and contribute to audits, including inspections, conducted by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller. This means in practice that parties should not insert in the contract clauses envisaging the payment of costs or fees that would be clearly disproportionate or excessive, thus having a dissuasive effect on one of the parties. Such clauses would indeed imply that the rights and obligations set out in Article 28(3)(h) would never be exercised in practice and would become purely theoretical whereas they form an integral part of the data protection safeguards envisaged under Article 28 GDPR. 1.4 Instructions infringing data protection law 146. According to Article 28(3), the processor must immediately inform the controller if, in its opinion, an instruction infringes the GDPR or other Union or Member State data protection provisions. 147. Indeed, the processor