software that is being used by the company. The IT-consultant is not hired to process personal data, and Company ABC determines that any access to personal data will be purely incidental and therefore very limited in practice. ABC therefore concludes that the IT-specialist is not a processor (nor a controller in its own right) and that Company ABC will take appropriate measures according to Article 32 of the GDPR in order to prevent the IT-consultant from processing personal data in an unauthorised manner. 84. As stated above, nothing prevents the processor from offering a preliminarily defined service but the controller must make the final decision to actively approve the way the processing is carried out, at least insofar as concerns the essential means of the processing. As stated above, a processor has a margin of manoeuvre as regards non-essential means, see above under sub-section 2.1.4. Example: Cloud service provider A municipality has decided to use a cloud service provider for handling information in its school and education services. The cloud service provides messaging services, videoconferences, storage of documents, calendar management, word processing etc. and will entail processing of personal data about school children and teachers. The cloud service provider has offered a standardized service that is offered worldwide. The municipality however must make sure that the agreement in place complies with Article 28(3) of the GDPR, that the personal data of which it is controller are processed for the municipality’s purposes only. It must also make sure that their specific instructions on storage periods, deletion of data etc. are respected by the cloud service provider regardless of what is generally offered in the standardized service. 5 DEFINITION OF THIRD PARTY/RECIPIENT 85. The Regulation not only defines the concepts of controller and processor but also the concepts of recipient and third party. As opposed to the concepts of controller and processor, the Regulation does not lay down specific obligations or responsibilities for recipients and third parties. These can be said to be relative concepts in the sense that they describe a relation to a controller or processor from a specific perspective, e.g. a controller or processor discloses data to a recipient. A recipient of personal data and a third party may well simultaneously be regarded as a controller or processor from other perspectives. For example, entities that are to be seen as recipients or third parties from one perspective, are controllers for the processing for which they determine the purpose and means. Third party 86. Article 4(10) defines a “third party” as a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or body other than • the data subject, • the controller, • the processor and --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted - After public consultation • persons who, under the direct authority of the controller or processor, are authorised to process personal data. 87. The definition generally corresponds to the previous definition of “third party” in Directive 95/46/EC. 88. Whereas the terms “personal data”, “data subject”, “controller” and “processor” are defined in the Regulation, the concept of “persons who, under the direct authority of the controller or processor, are authorised to process personal data” is not. It is, however, generally understood as referring to persons that belong to the legal entity of the controller or processor (an employee or a role highly comparable to that of employees, e.g. interim staff provided via a temporary employment agency) but only insofar as they are authorized to process personal data. An employee etc. who obtains access to data that he or she is not authorised to access and for other purposes than that of the employer does not fall within this category. Instead, this employee should be considered as a third party vis-à-vis the processing undertaken by the employer. Insofar as the employee processes personal data for his or her own purposes, distinct from those of his or her employer, he or she will then be considered a controller and take on all the resulting consequences and liabilities in terms of personal data processing.34 89. A third party thus refers to someone who, in the specific situation at hand, is not a data subject, a controller, a processor or an employee. For example, the controller may hire a processor and instruct it to transfer personal data to a third party. This third party will then be considered a controller in its own right for the processing that it carries out for its own purposes. It should be noted that, within a group of companies, a company other than the controller or the processor is a third party, even though it belongs to the same group as the company who acts as controller or processor. Example: Cleaning services Company A concludes a contract with a cleaning service company to clean its offices. The cleaners are not supposed to access or otherwise process personal data. Even though they may occasionally come across such data when moving around in the office, they can carry out their task without accessing data and they are contractually prohibited to access or otherwise process personal data that Company A keeps as controller. The cleaners are not employed by Company A nor are they seen as being under the direct authority of that company. There is no intention to engage the cleaning service company or its employees to process personal data on Company A’s behalf. The cleaning service company and its employees are therefore to be seen as a third party and the controller must make sure that there are adequate security measures to prevent that they have access to data and lay down a confidentiality duty in case they should accidentally come across personal data. Example: Company groups – parent company and subsidiaries Companies X and Y form part of the Group Z. Companies X and Y both process data about their respective employees for employee administration purposes. At one point, the parent company ZZ decides to request employee data from all subsidiaries in order to produce group wide statistics. When transferring data from companies X and Y to ZZ, the latter is to be regarded as a third party regardless of the fact that all companies are part of the same group. Company ZZ will be regarded as controller for its processing of the data for statistical purposes. 34 The employer (as original controller) could nevertheless retain some responsibility in case the new processing occurred because of a lack of adequate security measures. --- PAGE 30 --- Adopted - After public consultation Recipient 90. Article 4(9) defines a “recipient” as a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not. Public authorities are however not to be seen as recipients when they receive personal data in the framework of a particular inquiry in accordance with Union or Member State law (e.g. tax and customs authorities, financial investigation units etc.)35 91. The definition generally corresponds to the previous definition of “recipient” in Directive 95/46/EC. 92. The definition covers anyone who receives personal data, whether they are a third party or not. For example, when a controller sends personal data to another entity, either a processor or a third party, this entity is a recipient. A third party recipient shall be considered a controller for any processing that it carries out for its own purpose(s) after it receives the data. Example: Disclosure of data between companies The travel agency ExploreMore arranges travels on request from its individual customers. Within this service, they send the customers’ personal data to airlines, hotels and organisations of excursions in order for them to carry out their respective services. ExploreMore, the hotels, airlines and excursion providers are each to be seen as controllers for the processing that they carry out within their respective services. There is no controller-processor relation. However, the airlines, hotels and excursion providers are to be seen as recipients when receiving the personal data from ExploreMore. PART II – CONSEQUENCES OF ATTRIBUTING DIFFERENT ROLES 1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONTROLLER AND PROCESSOR 93. A distinct new feature in the GDPR are the provisions that impose obligations directly upon processors. For example, a processor must ensure that persons authorised to process the personal data have committed themselves to confidentiality (Article 28(3)); a processor must maintain a record of all categories of processing activities (Article 30(2)) and must implement appropriate technical and organisational measures (Article 32). A processor must also designate a data protection officer under certain conditions (Article 37) and has a duty to notify the controller without undue delay after becoming aware of a personal data breach (Article 33(2)). Furthermore, the rules on transfers of data to third countries (Chapter V) apply to processors as well as controllers. In this regard, the EDPB considers that Article 28(3) GDPR, while mandating a specific content for the necessary contract between controller and processor, imposes direct obligations upon processors, including the duty to assist the controller in ensuring compliance.36 1.1 Choice of the processor 94. The