data processing activity. For instance, there is no need to impose particularly stringent protections and procedures on a processor entrusted with a processing activity from which only minor risks arise: while each processor must comply with the requirements set out by the Regulation, the measures and procedures should be tailored to the specific situation. In any event, all elements of Article 28(3) must be covered by the contract. At the same time, the contract should include some elements that may help the processor in understanding the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects arising from the processing: because the activity is performed on behalf of the controller, often the controller has a deeper understanding of the risks that the processing entails since the controller is aware of the circumstances in which the processing is embedded. 114. Moving on to the required content of the contract or other legal act, EDPB interprets Article 28(3) in a way that it needs to set out: 49 See also EDPB Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), p. 5. 50 Recital 79 GDPR. 51 Recital 81 GDPR. --- PAGE 35 --- Adopted - After public consultation  the subject-matter of the processing (for instance, video surveillance recordings of people entering and leaving a high-security facility). While the subject matter of the processing is a broad concept, it needs to be formulated with enough specifications so that it is clear what the main object of the processing is;  the duration52 of the processing: the exact period of time, or the criteria used to determine it, should be specified; for instance, reference could be made to the duration of the processing agreement;  the nature of the processing: the type of operations performed as part of the processing (for instance: “filming”, “recording”, “archiving of images”, ...) and purpose of the processing (for instance: detecting unlawful entry). This description should be as comprehensive as possible, depending on the specific processing activity, so as to allow external parties (e.g. supervisory authorities) to understand the content and the risks of the processing entrusted to the processor.  the type of personal data: this should be specified in the most detailed manner as possible (for instance: video images of individuals as they enter and leave the facility). It would not be adequate merely to specify that it is “personal data pursuant to Article 4(1) GDPR” or “special categories of personal data pursuant to Article 9”. In case of special categories of data, the contract or legal act should at least specify which types of data are concerned, for example, “information regarding health records”, or “information as to whether the data subject is a member of a trade union”;  the categories of data subjects: this, too, should be indicated in a quite specific way (for instance: “visitors”, “employees”, delivery services etc.);  the obligations and rights of the controller: the rights of the controller are further dealt with in the following sections (e.g. with respect to the right of the controller to perform inspections and audits). As regards the obligations of the controller, examples include the controller’s obligation to provide the processor with the data mentioned in the contract, to provide and document any instruction bearing on the processing of data by the processor, to ensure, before and throughout the processing, compliance with the obligations set out in the GDPR on the processor's part, to supervise the processing, including by conducting audits and inspections with the processor. 115. While the GDPR lists elements that always need to be included in the agreement, other relevant information may need to be included, depending on the context and the risks of the processing as well as any additional applicable requirement. 1.3.1 The processor must only process data on documented instructions from the controller (Art. 28(3)(a) GDPR) 116. The need to specify this obligation stems from the fact that the processor processes data on behalf of the controller. Controllers must provide its processors with instructions related to each processing activity. Such instructions can include permissible and unacceptable handling of personal data, more detailed procedures, ways of securing data, etc. The processor shall not go beyond what is instructed by the controller. It is however possible for the processor to suggest elements that, if accepted by the controller, become part of the instructions given. 52 The duration of the processing is not necessarily equivalent to the duration of the agreement (there may be legal obligations to keep the data longer or shorter). --- PAGE 36 --- Adopted - After public consultation 117. When a processor processes data outside or beyond the controller’s instructions, and this amounts to a decision determining the purposes and means of processing, the processor will be in breach of its obligations and will even be considered a controller in respect of that processing in accordance with Article 28(10) (see sub-section 1.5 below53). 118. The instructions issued by the controller must be documented. For these purposes, it is recommended to include a procedure and a template for giving further instructions in an annex to the contract or other legal act. Alternatively, the instructions can be provided in any written form (e.g. e-mail), as well as in any other documented form as long as it is possible to keep records of such instructions. In any event, to avoid any difficulties in demonstrating that the controller’s instructions have been duly documented, the EDPB recommends keeping such instructions together with the contract or other legal act. 119. The duty for the processor to refrain from any processing activity not based on the controller’s instructions also applies to transfers of personal data to a third country or international organisation. The contract should specify the requirements for transfers to third countries or international organisations, taking into account the provisions of Chapter V of the GDPR. 120. The EDPB recommends that controller pay due attention to this specific point especially when the processor is going to delegate some processing activities to other processors, and when the processor has divisions or units located in third countries. If the instructions by the controller do not allow for transfers or disclosures to third countries, the processor will not be allowed to assign the processing to a sub-processor in a third country, nor will he be allowed to have the data processed in one of his non-EU divisions. 121. A processor may process data other than on documented instructions of the controller when the processor is required to process and/or transfer personal data on the basis of EU law or Member State law to which the processor is subject. This provision further reveals the importance of carefully negotiating and drafting data processing agreements, as, for example, legal advice may need to be sought by either party as to the existence of any such legal requirement. This needs to be done in a timely fashion, as the processor has an obligation to inform the controller of such requirement before starting the processing. Only when that same (EU or Member State) law forbids the processor to inform the controller on “important grounds of public interest”, there is no such information obligation. In any case, any transfer or disclosure may only take place if authorised by Union law, including in accordance with Article 48 of the GDPR. 1.3.2 The processor must ensure that persons authorised to process the personal data have committed themselves to confidentiality or are under an appropriate statutory obligation of confidentiality (Art. 28(3)(b) GDPR) 122. The contract needs to state that the processor must ensure that anyone it allows to process the personal data is committed to confidentiality. This may occur either via a specific contractual agreement, or due to statutory obligations already in place. 123. The broad concept of “persons authorised to process the personal data” includes employees and temporary workers. Generally speaking, the processor should make the personal data available only to the employees who actually need them to perform tasks for which the processor was hired by the controller. 53 See Part II, sub-section 1.5 (“Processor determining purposes and means of processing”). --- PAGE 37 --- Adopted - After public consultation 124. The commitment or obligation of confidentiality must be “appropriate”, i.e. it must effectively forbid the authorised person from disclosing any confidential information without authorisation, and it must be sufficiently broad so as to encompass all the personal data processed on behalf of the controller as well as the conditions under which the personal data are processed. 1.3.3 The processor must take all the measures required pursuant to Article 32 (Art. 28(3)(c) GDPR) 125. Article 32 requires the controller and the processor to implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures. While this obligation is already directly imposed on the processor whose processing operations fall within the scope of the GDPR, the duty to take all measures required pursuant to Article 32 still needs to be reflected in the contract concerning the processing activities entrusted by the