outsources a processing activity and in doing so, has a determinative influence on the purpose and (essential) means of the processing (e.g. by adjusting parameters of a service in such a way that it influences whose personal data shall be processed), is to be regarded as controller even though he or she will never have actual access to the data. Example: Market research 1 Company ABC wishes to understand which types of consumers are most likely to be interested in its products and contracts a service provider, XYZ, to obtain the relevant information. Company ABC instructs XYZ on what type of information it is interested in and provides a list of questions to be asked to those participating in the market research. Company ABC receives only statistical information (e.g., identifying consumer trends per region) from XYZ and does not have access to the personal data itself. Nevertheless, Company ABC decided that the processing should take place, the processing is carried out for its purpose and its activity and it has provided XYZ with detailed instructions on what information to collect. Company ABC is therefore still to be considered a controller with respect of the processing of personal data that takes place in order to deliver the information it has requested. XYZ may only process the data for the purpose given by Company ABC and according to its detailed instructions and is therefore to be regarded as processor. 16 Judgment in Fashion ID, C‐40/17, ECLI:EU:C:2019:629, paragraph 74: “(A)s the Advocate General noted, [...-] it appears that a natural or legal person may be a controller, within the meaning of Article 2(d) of Directive 95/46, jointly with others only in respect of operations involving the processing of personal data for which it determines jointly the purposes and means. By contrast, [...] that natural or legal person cannot be considered to be a controller, within the meaning of that provision, in the context of operations that precede or are subsequent in the overall chain of processing for which that person does not determine either the purposes or the means”. 17 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig-Holstein GmbH, C-210/16, ECLI :EU :C :2018 :388, paragraph 38. --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted - After public consultation Example: Market research 2 Company ABC wishes to understand which types of consumers are most likely to be interested in its products. Service provider XYZ is a market research agency which has collected information about consumer interests through a variety of questionnaires which pertain to a wide variety of products and services. Service provider XYZ has collected and analysed this data independently, according to its own methodology without receiving any instructions from Company ABC. To answer Company ABC’s request, service provider XYZ will generate statistical information, but does so without receiving any further instructions about which personal data should be processed or how to process it in order to generate these statistics. In this example, service provider XYZ acts as the sole controller, processing personal data for market research purposes, autonomously determining the means for doing so. Company ABC does not have any particular role or responsibility under data protection law in relation to these processing activities, as Company ABC receives anonymised statistics and is not involved in determining the purposes and means of the processing. 3 DEFINITION OF JOINT CONTROLLERS 3.1 Definition of joint controllers 46. The qualification as joint controllers may arise where more than one actor is involved in the processing. 47. While the concept is not new and already existed under Directive 95/46/EC, the GDPR, in its Article 26, introduces specific rules for joint controllers and sets a framework to govern their relationship. In addition, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) in recent rulings has brought clarifications on this concept and its implications.18 48. As further elaborated in Part II, section 2, the qualification of joint controllers will mainly have consequences in terms of allocation of obligations for compliance with data protection rules and in particular with respect to the rights of individuals. 49. In this perspective, the following section aims to provide guidance on the concept of joint controllers in accordance with the GDPR and the CJEU case law to assist entities in determining where they may be acting as joint controllers and applying the concept in practice. 3.2 Existence of joint controllership 3.2.1 General considerations 50. The definition of a controller in Article 4 (7) GDPR forms the starting point for determining joint controllership. The considerations in this section are thus directly related to and supplement the 18 See in particular, Unabhängiges Landeszentrum für Datenschutz Schleswig-Holstein v Wirtschaftsakademie, (C- 210/16), Tietosuojavaltuutettu v Jehovan todistajat — uskonnollinen yhdyskunta (C-25/17), Fashion ID GmbH & Co. KG v Verbraucherzentrale NRW eV (C-40/17). To be noted that while these judgments were issued by the CJEU on the interpretation of the concept of joint controllers under Directive 95/46/CE, they remain valid in the context of the GDPR, given that the elements determining this concept under the GDPR remain the same as under the Directive. --- PAGE 19 --- Adopted - After public consultation considerations in the section on the concept of controller. As a consequence, the assessment of joint controllership should mirror the assessment of "single" control developed above. 51. Article 26 GDPR, which reflects the definition in Article 4 (7) GDPR, provides that “[w]here two or more controllers jointly determine the purposes and means of processing, they shall be joint controllers.” In broad terms, joint controllership exists with regard to a specific processing activity when different parties determine jointly the purpose and means of this processing activity. Therefore, assessing the existence of joint controllers requires examining whether the determination of purposes and means that characterize a controller are decided by more than one party. “Jointly” must be interpreted as meaning “together with” or “not alone”, in different forms and combinations, as explained below. 52. The assessment of joint controllership should be carried out on a factual, rather than a formal, analysis of the actual influence on the purposes and means of the processing. All existing or envisaged arrangements should be checked against the factual circumstances regarding the relationship between the parties. A merely formal criterion would not be sufficient for at least two reasons: in some cases, the formal appointment of a joint controller - laid down for example by law or in a contract - would be absent; in other cases, it may be that the formal appointment does not reflect the reality of the arrangements, by formally entrusting the role of controller to an entity which actually is not in the position to "determine" the purposes and means of the processing. 53. Not all processing involving several entities give rise to joint controllership. The overarching criterion for joint controllership to exist is the joint participation of two or more entities in the determination of the purposes and means of a processing. More specifically, joint participation needs to include the determination of purposes on the one hand and the determination of means on the other hand. If each of these elements are determined by all entities concerned, they should be considered as joint controllers of the processing at issue. 3.2.2 Assessment of joint participation 54. Joint participation in the determination of purposes and means implies that more than one entity have a decisive influence over whether and how the processing takes place. In practice, joint participation can take several different forms. For example, joint participation can take the form of a common decision taken by two or more entities or result from converging decisions by two or more entities regarding the purposes and essential means. 55. Joint participation through a common decision means deciding together and involves a common intention in accordance with the most common understanding of the term “jointly” referred to in Article 26 of the GDPR. The situation of joint participation through converging decisions results more particularly from the case law of the CJEU on the concept of joint controllers. Decisions can be considered as converging on purposes and means if they complement each other and are necessary for the processing to take place in such manner that they have a tangible impact on the determination of the purposes and means of the processing. It should be highlighted that the notion of converging decisions needs to be considered in relation to the purposes and means of the processing but not other aspects of the commercial relationship between the parties.19 As such, an important criterion to identify converging decisions in this context is whether the processing would not be possible without both parties’ participation in the purposes and means in the sense that the processing by each party is 19 Indeed, all commercial arrangements involve converging decisions as part of the process by which an agreement is reached. --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted - After public consultation inseparable, i.e. inextricably linked. The situation of joint controllers acting on the basis of converging decisions should however be distinguished from the case of a processor,