There is no controller-processor relation. However, the airlines, hotels and excursion providers are to be seen as recipients when receiving the personal data from ExploreMore. PART II – CONSEQUENCES OF ATTRIBUTING DIFFERENT ROLES 1 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONTROLLER AND PROCESSOR 93. A distinct new feature in the GDPR are the provisions that impose obligations directly upon processors. For example, a processor must ensure that persons authorised to process the personal data have committed themselves to confidentiality (Article 28(3)); a processor must maintain a record of all categories of processing activities (Article 30(2)) and must implement appropriate technical and organisational measures (Article 32). A processor must also designate a data protection officer under certain conditions (Article 37) and has a duty to notify the controller without undue delay after becoming aware of a personal data breach (Article 33(2)). Furthermore, the rules on transfers of data to third countries (Chapter V) apply to processors as well as controllers. In this regard, the EDPB considers that Article 28(3) GDPR, while mandating a specific content for the necessary contract between controller and processor, imposes direct obligations upon processors, including the duty to assist the controller in ensuring compliance.36 1.1 Choice of the processor 94. The controller has the duty to use “only processors providing sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate technical and organisational measures”, so that processing meets the requirements of the 35 See also Recital 31 of the GDPR 36 For instance, the processor should assist the controller, where necessary and upon request, in ensuring compliance with obligations relating to data protection impact assessments (Recital 95 GDPR). This needs to be reflected in the contract between the controller and the processor pursuant to Article 28(3)(f) GDPR. --- PAGE 31 --- Adopted - After public consultation GDPR - including for the security of processing - and ensures the protection of data subject rights.37 The controller is therefore responsible for assessing the sufficiency of the guarantees provided by the processor and should be able to prove that it has taken all of the elements provided in the GDPR into serious consideration. 95. The guarantees “provided” by the processor are those that the processor is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the controller, as those are the only ones that can effectively be taken into account by the controller when assessing compliance with its obligations. Often this will require an exchange of relevant documentation (e.g. privacy policy, terms of service, record of processing activities, records management policy, information security policy, reports of external data protection audits, recognised international certifications, like ISO 27000 series). 96. The controller’s assessment of whether the guarantees are sufficient is a form of risk assessment, which will greatly depend on the type of processing entrusted to the processor and needs to be made on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as well as the risks for the rights and freedoms of natural persons. As a consequence, the EDPB cannot provide an exhaustive list of the documents or actions that the processor needs to show or demonstrate in any given scenario, as this largely depends on the specific circumstances of the processing. 97. The following elements38 should be taken into account by the controller in order to assess the sufficiency of the guarantees: the processor’s expert knowledge (e.g. technical expertise with regard to security measures and data breaches); the processor’s reliability; the processor’s resources. The reputation of the processor on the market may also be a relevant factor for controllers to consider. 98. Furthermore, the adherence to an approved code of conduct or certification mechanism can be used as an element by which sufficient guarantees can be demonstrated.39 The processors are therefore advised to inform the controller as to this circumstance, as well as to any change in such adherence. 99. The obligation to use only processors “providing sufficient guarantees” contained in Article 28(1) GDPR is a continuous obligation. It does not end at the moment where the controller and processor conclude a contract or other legal act. Rather the controller should, at appropriate intervals, verify the processor’s guarantees, including through audits and inspections where appropriate.40 1.2 Form of the contract or other legal act 100. Any processing of personal data by a processor must be governed by a contract or other legal act under EU or Member State law between the controller and the processor, as required by Article 28(3) GDPR. 101. Such legal act must be in writing, including in electronic form.41 Therefore, non-written agreements (regardless of how thorough or effective they are) cannot be considered sufficient to meet the requirements laid down by Article 28 GDPR. To avoid any difficulties in demonstrating that the contract or other legal act is actually in force, the EDPB recommends ensuring that the necessary signatures are included in the legal act, in line with applicable law (e.g. contract law). 37 Article 28(1) and Recital 81 GDPR. 38 Recital 81 GDPR. 39 Article 28(5) and Recital 81 GDPR. 40 See also Article 28(3)h GDPR. 41 Article 28(9) GDPR. --- PAGE 32 --- Adopted - After public consultation 102. Furthermore, the contract or the other legal act under Union or Member State law must be binding on the processor with regard to the controller, i.e. it must establish obligations on the processor that are binding as a matter of EU or Member State law. Also it must set out the obligations of the controller. In most cases, there will be a contract, but the Regulation also refers to “other legal act”, such as a national law (primary or secondary) or other legal instrument. If the legal act does not include all the minimum required content, it must be supplemented with a contract or another legal act that includes the missing elements. 103. Since the Regulation establishes a clear obligation to enter into a written contract, where no other relevant legal act is in force, the absence thereof is an infringement of the GDPR.42 Both the controller and processor are responsible for ensuring that there is a contract or other legal act to govern the processing.43 Subject to the provisions of Article 83 of the GDPR, the competent supervisory authority will be able to direct an administrative fine against both the controller and the processor, taking into account the circumstances of each individual case. Contracts that have been entered into before the date of application of the GDPR should have been updated in light of Article 28(3). The absence of such update, in order to bring a previously existing contract in line with the requirements of the GDPR, constitutes an infringement of Article 28(3). A written contract pursuant to Article 28(3) GDPR may be embedded in a broader contract, such as a service level agreement. In order to facilitate the demonstration of compliance with the GDPR, the EDPB recommends that the elements of the contract that seek to give effect to Article 28 GDPR be clearly identified as such in one place (for example in an annex). 104. In order to comply with the duty to enter into a contract, the controller and the processor may choose to negotiate their own contract including all the compulsory elements or to rely, in whole or in part, on standard contractual clauses in relation to obligations under Article 28.44 42 The presence (or absence) of a written arrangement, however, is not decisive for the existence of a controller- processor relationship. Where there is reason to believe that the contract does not correspond with reality in terms of actual control, on the basis of a factual analysis of the circumstances surrounding the relationship between the parties and the processing of personal data being carried out, the agreement may be set aside. Conversely, a controller-processor relationship might still be held to exist in absence of a written processing agreement. This would, however, imply a violation of Article 28(3) GDPR. Moreover, in certain circumstances, the absence of a clear definition of the relationship between the controller and the processor may raise the problem of the lack of legal basis on which every processing should be based, e.g. in respect of the communication of data between the controller and the alleged processor. 43 Article 28(3) is not only applicable to controllers. In the situation where only the processor is subject to the territorial scope of the GDPR, the obligation shall only be directly applicable to the processor, see also EDPB Guidelines 3/2018 on the territorial scope of the GDPR, p. 12. 44 Article 28(6) GDPR. The EDPB recalls that standard contractual clauses for the purposes of compliance with Article 28 GDPR are not the same as standard contractual clauses referred to in Article 46(2). While the former further stipulate and clarify how the provisions of Article 28(3) and (4) will be fulfilled, the latter provide appropriate safeguards in case of transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation in the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45(3). --- PAGE 33 ---