data subjects 182. Article 26(1) provides the possibility for joint controllers to designate in the arrangement a contact point for data subjects. Such designation is not mandatory. 183. Being informed of a single way to contact possible multiple joint controllers enables data subjects to know who they can contact with regard to all issues related to the processing of their personal data. In addition, it allows multiple joint controllers to coordinate in a more efficient manner their relations and communications vis-à-vis data subjects. 184. For these reasons, in order to facilitate the exercise of data subjects’ rights under the GDPR, the EDPB recommends joint controllers to designate such contact point. 185. The contact point can be the DPO, if any, the representative in the Union (for joint controllers not established in the Union) or any other contact point where information can be obtained. --- PAGE 48 --- Adopted - After public consultation Irrespective of the terms of the arrangement, data subjects may exercise their rights in respect of and against each of the joint controllers. 186. Under Article 26(3), a data subject is not bound by the terms of the arrangement and may exercise his or her rights under the GDPR in respect of and against each of the joint data controllers. 187. For example, in case of joint controllers established in different Member States, or if only one of the joint controllers is established in the Union, the data subject may contact, at his or her choice, either the controller established in the Member State of his or her habitual residence or place of work, or the controller established elsewhere in the EU or in the EEA. 188. Even if the arrangement and the available essence of it indicate a contact point to receive and handle all data subjects’ requests, the data subjects themselves may still choose otherwise. 189. Therefore, it is important that joint controllers organise in advance in their arrangement how they will manage answers to requests they could receive from data subjects. In this respect, it is recommended that joint controllers communicate to the other controllers in charge or to the designated contact point, the requests received in order to be effectively handled. Requiring data subjects to contact the designated contact point or the controller in charge would impose an excessive burden on the data subject that would be contrary to the objective of facilitating the exercise of their rights under the GDPR. 2.3 Obligations towards data protection authorities 190. Joint controllers should organise in the arrangement the way they will communicate with the competent supervisory data protection authorities. Such communication could cover possible consultation under Article 36 of the GDPR, notification of a personal data breach, designation of a data protection officer. 191. It should be recalled that data protection authorities are not bound by the terms of the arrangement whether on the issue of the qualification of the parties as joint controllers or the designated contact point. Therefore, the authorities can contact any of the joint controllers to exercise their powers under Article 58 with respect to the joint processing. --- PAGE 49 --- Adopted - After public consultation Is another party involved in the personal data processing in question? YES NO Are you appointed as controller according to a legal act for the processing in question? (explicit legal competence) NO YES Is the processing necessary in order to carry out a task for which you are responsible according to a legal act? (implicit legal competence) Do you decide? • the purpose or purposes that the data will be processed for • which personal data that shall be collected and processed • which categories of individuals that the processed data will refer to • whether the processed data shall be disclosed and to whom • for how long the personal data will be stored YES NO YES No, I carry out the processing on behalf of another party, in accordance with its instructions. I make decisions about certain non-essential means to be used (e.g., what IT systems or other technical means to use for the processing or details of the security measures based on the general security objectives set by the other party) No, I carry out the processing on behalf of another party and solely in accordance with its instructions. I do not make any decisions as to purposes and means of the processing of my own NO NO I DO NOT KNOW You are the sole controller and must decide on purposes and means of the processing The legal act applies and you are the controller for that specific processing You are the controller of the processing necessary to execute this task You are the controller for this personal data processing (see below for assessment of joint control if other entities are involved) You are a processor Annex I – Flowchart for applying the concepts of controller, processor and joint controllers in practice Note: in order to properly assess the role of each entity involved, one must first identify the specific personal data processing at stake and its exact purpose. If multiple entities are involved, it is necessary to assess whether the purposes and means are determined jointly, leading to joint controllership. --- PAGE 50 --- Adopted - After public consultation I don’t know who decides on the purposes or means of the processing. : The following factors may help to determine the appropriate qualification of the roles: Factors that indicate that you are the controller Factors that indicate that you are the processor • You obtain a benefit from, or have an interest in, the processing (other than the mere payment for services received from another controller) • You make decisions about the individuals concerned as part of or as a result of the processing (e.g. the data subjects are your employees) • The processing activities can be considered as naturally attached to the role or activities of your entity (e.g. due to traditional roles or professional expertise) which entails responsibilities from a data protection point of view • The processing refers to your relation with the data subjects as employees, customers, members etc. • You have complete autonomy in deciding how the personal data is processed • You have entrusted the processing of personal data to an external organisation to process the personal data on your behalf • You process the personal data for another party’s purposes and in accordance with its documented instructions - you do not have a purpose of your own for the processing. • Another party monitors your processing activities in order to ensure that you comply with instructions and terms of contract. • You do not pursue your own purpose in the processing other than your own business interest to provide services. • You have been engaged for carrying out specific processing activities by someone who in turn has been engaged to process data on another party’s behalf and on this party’s documented instructions (you are a sub- processor) I DO NOT KNOW --- PAGE 51 --- Adopted - After public consultation Do you and (an)other party(ies) involved jointly determine the purposes and means of the processing? Does more than one party have a decisive influence over whether and how the processing takes place – either by a common decision or by converging decisions that complement each other and are necessary for the processing because they have a tangible impact on the determination of the purposes and means? This means that the processing would not be possible without both parties’ participation - the processing by each party is inseparable, i.e. inextricably linked. YES NO Do the common or converging decisions on purposes and means relate to the whole of the processing in question? NO YES No, the common or converging decisions only relate to specific stages of the processing You are the sole controller – the other parties involved may be separate independent controllers for their own purpose or processors in accordance with the flowchart above You are joint controllers for the whole processing You are joint controllers for the stages of the processing for which you determine purposes and means together and separate controllers for those processing operations where you determine purposes and means separately Joint controllership - If you are the controller and other parties are involved in the personal data processing: