“persons authorised to process the personal data” includes employees and temporary workers. Generally speaking, the processor should make the personal data available only to the employees who actually need them to perform tasks for which the processor was hired by the controller. 53 See Part II, sub-section 1.5 (“Processor determining purposes and means of processing”). --- PAGE 37 --- Adopted - After public consultation 124. The commitment or obligation of confidentiality must be “appropriate”, i.e. it must effectively forbid the authorised person from disclosing any confidential information without authorisation, and it must be sufficiently broad so as to encompass all the personal data processed on behalf of the controller as well as the conditions under which the personal data are processed. 1.3.3 The processor must take all the measures required pursuant to Article 32 (Art. 28(3)(c) GDPR) 125. Article 32 requires the controller and the processor to implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures. While this obligation is already directly imposed on the processor whose processing operations fall within the scope of the GDPR, the duty to take all measures required pursuant to Article 32 still needs to be reflected in the contract concerning the processing activities entrusted by the controller. 126. As indicated earlier, the processing contract should not merely restate the provisions of the GDPR. The contract needs to include or reference information as to the security measures to be adopted, an obligation on the processor to obtain the controller’s approval before making changes, and a regular review of the security measures so as to ensure their appropriateness with regard to risks, which may evolve over time. The degree of detail of the information as to the security measures to be included in the contract must be such as to enable the controller to assess the appropriateness of the measures pursuant to Article 32(1) GDPR. Moreover, the description is also necessary in order to enable the controller to comply with its accountability duty pursuant to Article 5(2) and Article 24 GDPR as regards the security measures imposed on the processor. A corresponding obligation of the processor to assist the controller and to make available all information necessary to demonstrate compliance can be inferred from Art. 28.3 (f) and (h) GDPR. 127. The level of instructions provided by the controller to the processor as to the measures to be implemented will depend on the specific circumstances. In some cases, the controller may provide a clear and detailed description of the security measures to be implemented. In other cases, the controller may describe the minimum security objectives to be achieved, while requesting the processor to propose implementation of specific security measures. In any event, the controller must provide the processor with a description of the processing activities and security objectives (based on the controller’s risk assessment), as well as approve the measures proposed by the processor. This could be included in an annex to the contract. The controller exercises its decision-making power over the main features of the security measures, be it by explicitly listing the measures or by approving those proposed by the processor. 1.3.4 The processor must respect the conditions referred to in Article 28(2) and 28(4) for engaging another processor (Art. 28(3)(d) GDPR). 128. The agreement must specify that the processor may not engage another processor without the controller’s prior written authorisation and whether this authorisation will be specific or general. In case of general authorisation, the processor has to inform the controller of any change of sub- processors under a written authorisation, and give the controller the opportunity to object. It is recommended that the contract set out the process for this. It should be noted that the processor’s duty to inform the controller of any change of sub-processors implies that the processor actively --- PAGE 38 --- Adopted - After public consultation indicates or flags such changes toward the controller.54 Also, where specific authorisation is required, the contract should set out the process for obtaining such authorisation. 129. When the processor engages another processor, a contract must be put in place between them, imposing the same data protection obligations as those imposed on the original processor or these obligations must be imposed by another legal act under Union or Member State law (see also below paragraph 160). This includes the obligation under Article 28(3)(h) to allow for and contribute to audits by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller.55 The processor is liable to the controller for the other processors’ compliance with data protection obligations (for further details on the recommended content of the agreement see sub-section 1.6 below56). 1.3.5 The processor must assist the controller for the fulfilment of its obligation to respond to requests for exercising the data subject's rights (Article 28(3) (e) GDPR). 130. While ensuring that data subjects requests are dealt with is up to the controller, the contract must stipulate that the processor has an obligation to provide assistance “by appropriate technical and organisational measures, insofar as this is possible”. The nature of this assistance may vary greatly “taking into account the nature of the processing” and depending on the type of activity entrusted to the processor. The details concerning the assistance to be provided by the processor should be included in the contract or in an annex thereto. 131. While the assistance may simply consist in promptly forwarding any request received and/or enabling the controller to directly extract and manage the relevant personal data, in some circumstances the processor will be given more specific, technical duties, especially when it is in the position of extracting and managing the personal data. 132. It is crucial to bear in mind that, although the practical management of individual requests can be outsourced to the processor, the controller bears the responsibility for complying with such requests. Therefore, the assessment as to whether requests by data subjects are admissible and/or the requirements set by the GDPR are met should be performed by the controller, either on a case-by-case basis or through clear instructions provided to the processor in the contract before the start of the processing. Also, the deadlines set out by Chapter III cannot be extended by the controller based on the fact that the necessary information must be provided by the processor. 1.3.6 The processor must assist the controller in ensuring compliance with the obligations pursuant to Articles 32 to 36 (Art. 28(3)(f) GDPR). 133. It is necessary for the contract to avoid merely restating these duties of assistance: the agreement should contain details as to how the processor is asked to help the controller meet the listed obligations. For example, procedures and template forms may be added in the annexes to the agreement, allowing the processor to provide the controller with all the necessary information. 134. The type and degree of assistance to be provided by the processor may vary widely “taking into account the nature of processing and the information available to the processor”. The controller must 54 In this regard it is, by contrast, e.g. not sufficient for the processor to merely provide the controller with a generalized access to a list of the sub-processors which might be updated from time to time, without pointing to each new sub-processor envisaged. In other words, the processor must actively inform the controller of any change to the list (i.e. in particular of each new envisaged sub-processor). 55 See also EDPB Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), 9 July 2019, at paragraph 44. 56 See Part II, sub-section 1.6 (“Sub-processors”). --- PAGE 39 --- Adopted - After public consultation adequately inform the processor as to the risk involved in the processing and as to any other circumstance that may help the processor meet its duty. 135. Moving on to the specific obligations, the processor has, first, a duty to assist the controller in meeting the obligation to adopt adequate technical and organisational measures to ensure security of processing.57 While this may overlap, to some extent, with the requirement that the processor itself adopts adequate security measures, where the processing operations of the processor fall within the scope of the GDPR, they remain two distinct obligations, since one refers to the processor’s own measures and the other refers to the controller’s. 136. Secondly, the processor must assist the controller in meeting the obligation to notify personal data breaches to the supervisory authority and to data subjects. The processor must notify the controller whenever it discovers a personal data breach affecting the processor’s or a sub-processor’s facilities / IT systems and help the controller in obtaining the information that need to be stated in the report to the supervisory authority.58 The GDPR requires that the controller notify a breach without undue delay in order to minimize the harm for individuals and to maximize the possibility to address the breach in an adequate manner. Thus, the processor’s notification to the data controller should also take place without undue delay.59 Depending on the specific