of sub- processors (see sub-section 1.6 below67). 145. The issue of the allocation of costs between a controller and a processor concerning audits is not covered by the GDPR and is subject to commercial considerations. However, Article 28 (3)(h) requires that the contract include an obligation for the processor to make available all information necessary to the controller and an obligation to allow for and contribute to audits, including inspections, conducted by the controller or another auditor mandated by the controller. This means in practice that parties should not insert in the contract clauses envisaging the payment of costs or fees that would be clearly disproportionate or excessive, thus having a dissuasive effect on one of the parties. Such clauses would indeed imply that the rights and obligations set out in Article 28(3)(h) would never be exercised in practice and would become purely theoretical whereas they form an integral part of the data protection safeguards envisaged under Article 28 GDPR. 1.4 Instructions infringing data protection law 146. According to Article 28(3), the processor must immediately inform the controller if, in its opinion, an instruction infringes the GDPR or other Union or Member State data protection provisions. 147. Indeed, the processor has a duty to comply with the controller’s instructions, but it also has a general obligation to comply with the law. An instruction that infringes data protection law seems to cause a conflict between the aforementioned two obligations. 148. Once informed that one of its instructions may be in breach of data protection law, the controller will have to assess the situation and determine whether the instruction actually violates data protection law. 149. The EDPB recommends the parties to negotiate and agree in the contract the consequences of the notification of an infringing instruction sent by the processor and in case of inaction from the controller in this context. One example would be to insert a clause on the termination of the contract if the controller persists with an unlawful instruction. Another example would be a clause on the possibility for the processor to suspend the implementation of the affected instruction until the controller confirms, amends or withdraws its instruction68. 65 See Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), paragraph 43. 66 See Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), paragraph 43. 67 See Part II, sub-section 1.6 (“Sub-processors”). 68 See EDPB-EDPS Joint Opinion 1/2021 on standard contractual clauses between controllers and processors, paragraph 39. --- PAGE 42 --- Adopted - After public consultation 1.5 Processor determining purposes and means of processing 150. If the processor infringes the Regulation by determining the purposes and means of processing, it shall be considered as a controller in respect of that processing (Article 28(10) GDPR). 1.6 Sub-processors 151. Data processing activities are often carried out by a great number of actors, and the chains of subcontracting are becoming increasingly complex. The GDPR introduces specific obligations that are triggered when a (sub-)processor intends to engage another player, thereby adding another link to the chain, by entrusting to it activities requiring the processing of personal data. The analysis of whether the service provider acts as a sub-processor should be carried out in line with what described above on the concept of processor (see above paragraph 83). 152. Although the chain may be quite long, the controller retains its pivotal role in determining the purpose and means of processing. Article 28(2) GDPR stipulates that the processor shall not engage another processor without prior specific or general written authorisation of the controller (including in electronic form). In the case of general written authorisation, the processor must inform the controller of any intended changes concerning the addition or replacement of other processors, thereby giving the controller the opportunity to object to such changes. In both cases, the processor must obtain the controller’s authorisation in writing before any personal data processing is entrusted to the sub- processor. In order to make the assessment and the decision whether to authorise subcontracting, a list of intended sub-processors (including per each: their locations, what they will be doing and proof of what safeguards have been implemented) will have to be provided to the data controller by the processor.69 153. The prior written authorisation may be specific, i.e. referring to a specific sub-processor for a specific processing activity and at a specific time, or general. This should be specified in the contract or other legal act that governs the processing. 154. In cases where the controller decides to accept certain sub-processors at the time of the signature of the contract, a list of approved sub-processors should be included in the contract or an annex thereto. The list should then be kept up to date, in accordance with the general or specific authorisation given by the controller. 155. If the controller chooses to give its specific authorisation, it should specify in writing which sub- processor and what processing activity it refers to. Any subsequent change will need to be further authorised by the controller before it is put in place. If the processor’s request for a specific authorisation is not answered to within the set timeframe, it should be held as denied. The controller should make its decision to grant or withhold authorisation taking into account its obligation to only use processors providing “sufficient guarantees” (see sub-section 1.1 above70). 156. Alternatively, the controller may provide its general authorisation to the use of sub-processors (in the contract, including a list with such sub-processors in an annex thereto), which should be supplemented with criteria to guide the processor’s choice (e.g., guarantees in terms of technical and organisational 69 This information is needed, so that the controller can comply with the accountability principle in Article 24 and with provisions of Articles 28(1), 32 and Chapter V of the GDPR. 70 See Part II - sub-section 1.1 (“Choice of the processor”). --- PAGE 43 --- Adopted - After public consultation measures, expert knowledge, reliability and resources).71 In this scenario, the processor needs to inform the controller in due time of any intended addition or replacement of sub-processor(s) so as to provide the controller with the opportunity to object. 157. Therefore, the main difference between the specific authorisation and the general authorisation scenarios lies in the meaning given to the controller’s silence: in the general authorisation situation, the controller’s failure to object within the set timeframe can be interpreted as authorisation. 158. In both scenarios, the contract should include details as to the timeframe for the controller’s approval or objection and as to how the parties intend to communicate regarding this topic (e.g. templates). Such timeframe needs to be reasonable in light of the type of processing, the complexity of the activities entrusted to the processor (and the sub-processors) and the relationship between the parties. In addition, the contract should include details as to the practical steps following the controller’s objection (e.g. by specifying time frame within which the controller and processor should decide whether the processing shall be terminated). 159. Regardless of the criteria suggested by the controller to choose providers, the processor remains fully liable to the controller for the performance of the sub-processors’ obligations (Article 28(4) GDPR). Therefore, the processor should ensure it proposes sub-processors providing sufficient guarantees. 160. Furthermore, when a processor intends to employ an (authorised) sub-processor, it must enter into a contract with it that imposes the same obligations as those imposed on the first processor by the controller or the obligations must be imposed by another legal act under EU or Member State law. The whole chain of processing activities needs to be regulated by written agreements. Imposing the “same” obligations should be construed in a functional rather than in a formal way: it is not necessary for the contract to include exactly the same words as those used in the contract between the controller and the processor, but it should ensure that the obligations in substance are the same. This also means that if the processor entrusts the sub-processor with a specific part of the processing, to which some of the obligations cannot apply, such obligations should not be included “by default” in the contract with the sub-processor, as this would only generate uncertainty. As an example, as to assistance with data breach related obligations, notification of a data breach by a sub-processor directly to the controller could be done if all three agree. However, in the case of such direct notification the processor should be informed and get a copy of the notification. 2 CONSEQUENCES OF JOINT CONTROLLERSHIP 2.1 Determining in a transparent manner the respective responsibilities of joint controllers for compliance with the obligations under the GDPR 161. Article 26(1) of the GDPR provides that joint controllers shall in a transparent manner determine and agree on their respective responsibilities for compliance with the obligations under the Regulation. 162. Joint controllers thus need to set “who does what” by deciding between themselves