is carried out for Company A’s purpose to pay salaries to its employees and the payroll administrator may not use the data for any purpose of its own. The way in which the payroll administrator should carry out the processing is in essence clearly and tightly defined. Nevertheless, the payroll administrator may decide on certain detailed matters around the processing such as which software to use, how to distribute access within its own organisation etc. This does not alter its role as processor as long as the administrator does not go against or beyond the instructions given by Company A. Example: Bank payments As part of the instructions from Employer A, the payroll administration transmits information to Bank B so that they can carry out the actual payment to the employees of Employer A. This activity includes processing of personal data by Bank B which it carries out for the purpose of performing banking activity. Within this activity, the bank decides independently from Employer A on which data that have to be processed to provide the service, for how long the data must be stored etc. Employer A cannot have any influence on the purpose and means of Bank B’s processing of data. Bank B is therefore to be seen as a controller for this processing and the transmission of personal data from the payroll administration is to be regarded as a disclosure of information between two controllers, from Employer A to Bank B. Example: Accountants Employer A also hires Accounting firm C to carry out audits of their bookkeeping and therefore transfers data about financial transactions (including personal data) to C. Accounting firm C processes these data without detailed instructions from A. Accounting firm C decides itself, in accordance with legal provisions regulating the tasks of the auditing activities carried out by C, that the data it collects --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted - After public consultation will only be processed for the purpose of auditing A and it determines what data it needs to have, which categories of persons that need to be registered, how long the data shall be kept and what technical means to use. Under these circumstances, Accounting firm C is to be regarded as a controller of its own when performing its auditing services for A. However, this assessment may be different depending on the level of instructions from A. In a situation where the law does not lay down specific obligations for the accounting firm and the client company provides very detailed instructions on the processing, the accounting firm would indeed be acting as a processor. A distinction could be made between a situation where the processing is - in accordance with the laws regulating this profession - done as part of the accounting firm’s core activity and where the processing is a more limited, ancillary task that is carried out as part of the client company’s activity. Example: Hosting services Employer A hires hosting service H to store encrypted data on H’s servers. The hosting service H does not determine whether the data it hosts are personal data nor does it process data in any other way than storing it on its servers. As storage is one example of a personal data processing activity, the hosting service H is processing personal data on employer A’s behalf and is therefore a processor. Employer A must provide the necessary instructions to H and a data processing agreement according to Article 28 must be concluded, requiring H to implement technical and organisational security measures. H must assist A in ensuring that the necessary security measures are taken and notify it in case of any personal data breach. 41. Even though decisions on non-essential means can be left to the processor, the controller must still stipulate certain elements in the processor agreement, such as – in relation to the security requirement, e.g. an instruction to take all measures required pursuant to Article 32 of the GDPR. The agreement must also state that the processor shall assist the controller in ensuring compliance with, for example, Article 32. In any event, the controller remains responsible for the implementation of appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure and be able to demonstrate that the processing is performed in accordance with the Regulation (Article 24). In doing so, the controller must take into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing as well as the risks for rights and freedoms of natural persons. For this reason, the controller must be fully informed about the means that are used so that it can take an informed decision in this regard. In order for the controller to be able to demonstrate the lawfulness of the processing, it is advisable to document at the minimum necessary technical and organisational measures in the contract or other legally binding instrument between the controller and the processor. Example: Call centre Company X decides to outsource a part of its customer service relations to a call centre. The call centre receives identifiable data about customer purchases, as well contact information. The call centre uses its own software and IT infrastructure to manage the personal data concerning Company X’s customers. Company X signs a processor agreement with the provider of the call centre in accordance with Article 28 GDPR, after determining that the technical and organisational security measures proposed by the call centre are appropriate for the risks concerned and that the call centre will only process the personal data for the purposes of Company X and in accordance with its instructions. Company X does not provide any further instructions to the call centre as to specific software to be used nor any detailed instructions regarding the specific security measures to be implemented. In this example, Company X remains a controller, despite the fact that the call centre has determined certain non-essential means of the processing. --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted - After public consultation 2.1.5 “Of the processing of personal data” 42. The purposes and means determined by the controller must relate to the “processing of personal data”. Article 4(2) GDPR defines the processing of personal data as “any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data or on sets of personal data”. As a result, the concept of a controller can be linked either to a single processing operation or to a set of operations. In practice, this may mean that the control exercised by a particular entity may extend to the entirety of processing at issue but may also be limited to a particular stage in the processing.16 43. In practice, the processing of personal data involving several actors may be divided into several smaller processing operations for which each actor could be considered to determine the purpose and means individually. On the other hand, a sequence or set of processing operations involving several actors may also take place for the same purpose(s), in which case it is possible that the processing involves one or more joint controllers. In other words, it is possible that at “micro-level” the different processing operations of the chain appear as disconnected, as each of them may have a different purpose. However, it is necessary to double check whether at “macro-level” these processing operations should not be considered as a “set of operations” pursuing a joint purpose using jointly defined means. 44. Anyone who decides to process data must consider whether this includes personal data and, if so, what the obligations are according to the GDPR. An actor will be considered a “controller” even if it does not deliberately target personal data as such or has wrongfully assessed that it does not process personal data. 45. It is not necessary that the controller actually has access to the data that is being processed.17 Someone who outsources a processing activity and in doing so, has a determinative influence on the purpose and (essential) means of the processing (e.g. by adjusting parameters of a service in such a way that it influences whose personal data shall be processed), is to be regarded as controller even though he or she will never have actual access to the data. Example: Market research 1 Company ABC wishes to understand which types of consumers are most likely to be interested in its products and contracts a service provider, XYZ, to obtain the relevant information. Company ABC instructs XYZ on what type of information it is interested in and provides a list of questions to be asked to those participating in the market research. Company ABC receives only statistical information (e.g., identifying consumer trends per region) from XYZ and does not have access to the personal data itself. Nevertheless, Company ABC decided that the processing should take place, the processing is carried out for its purpose and its activity and it has provided XYZ with detailed instructions on what information to collect. Company ABC is therefore still to be considered a controller with respect of the processing of personal data that takes