contract. However, the terms of a contract are not decisive in all circumstances, as this would simply allow parties to allocate responsibility as they see fit. It is not possible either to become a controller or to escape controller obligations simply by shaping the contract in a certain way where the factual circumstances say something else. 29. If one party in fact decides why and how personal data are processed that party will be a controller even if a contract says that it is a processor. Similarly, it is not because a commercial contract uses the term “subcontractor” that an entity shall be considered a processor from the perspective of data protection law.12 30. In line with the factual approach, the word “determines” means that the entity that actually exerts a decisive influence on the purposes and means of the processing is the controller. Normally, a processor agreement establishes who the determining party (controller) and the instructed party (processor) are. Even if the processor offers a service that is preliminary defined in a specific way, the controller has to be presented with a detailed description of the service and must make the final decision to actively approve the way the processing is carried out and request changes if necessary. Furthermore, the processor cannot at a later stage change the essential elements of the processing without the approval of the controller. Example: standardised cloud storage service A large cloud storage provider offers its customers the ability to store large volumes of personal data. The service is completely standardised, with customers having little or no ability to customise the service. The terms of the contract are determined and drawn up unilaterally by the cloud service provider, provided to the customer on a “take it or leave it basis”. Company X decides to make use of the cloud provider to store personal data concerning its customers. Company X will still be considered a controller, given its decision to make use of this particular cloud service provider in order to process personal data for its purposes. Insofar as the cloud service provider does not process the personal data for its own purposes and stores the data solely on behalf of its customers and in accordance with instructions, the service provider will be considered as a processor. 12 See e.g., Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 10/2006 on the processing of personal data by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT), 22 November 2006, WP128, p. 11. --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted - After public consultation 2.1.3 “Alone or jointly with others” 31. Article 4(7) recognizes that the “purposes and means” of the processing might be determined by more than one actor. It states that the controller is the actor who “alone or jointly with others” determines the purposes and means of the processing. This means that several different entities may act as controllers for the same processing, with each of them then being subject to the applicable data protection provisions. Correspondingly, an organisation can still be a controller even if it does not make all the decisions as to purposes and means. The criteria for joint controllership and the extent to which two or more actors jointly exercise control may take different forms, as clarified later on.13 2.1.4 “Purposes and means” 32. The fourth building block of the controller definition refers to the object of the controller’s influence, namely the “purposes and means” of the processing. It represents the substantive part of the controller concept: what a party should determine in order to qualify as controller. 33. Dictionaries define “purpose” as “an anticipated outcome that is intended or that guides your planned actions” and “means” as “how a result is obtained or an end is achieved”. 34. The GDPR establishes that data must be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a way incompatible with those purposes. Determination of the "purposes" of the processing and the "means" to achieve them is therefore particularly important. 35. Determining the purposes and the means amounts to deciding respectively the "why" and the "how" of the processing:14 given a particular processing operation, the controller is the actor who has determined why the processing is taking place (i.e., “to what end”; or “what for”) and how this objective shall be reached (i.e. which means shall be employed to attain the objective). A natural or legal person who exerts such influence over the processing of personal data, thereby participates in the determination of the purposes and means of that processing in accordance with the definition in Article 4(7) GDPR.15 36. The controller must decide on both purpose and means of the processing as described below. As a result, the controller cannot settle with only determining the purpose. It must also make decisions about the means of the processing. Conversely, the party acting as processor can never determine the purpose of the processing. 37. In practice, if a controller engages a processor to carry out the processing on its behalf, it often means that the processor shall be able to make certain decisions of its own on how to carry out the processing. The EDPB recognizes that some margin of manoeuvre may exist for the processor also to be able to make some decisions in relation to the processing. In this perspective, there is a need to provide guidance about which level of influence on the "why" and the "how" should entail the qualification of an entity as a controller and to what extent a processor may make decisions of its own. 38. When one entity clearly determines purposes and means, entrusting another entity with processing activities that amount to the execution of its detailed instructions, the situation is straightforward, and there is no doubt that the second entity should be regarded as a processor, whereas the first entity is the controller. 13 See Part I, Section 3 (“Definition of joint controllers”). 14 See also the Opinion of Advocate General Bot in Wirtschaftsakademie, C‐210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2017:796, paragraph 46. 15 Judgment in Jehovah’s witnesses, C-25/17, ECLI:EU:C:2018:551, paragraph 68. --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted - After public consultation Essential vs. non-essential means 39. The question is where to draw the line between decisions that are reserved to the controller and decisions that can be left to the discretion of the processor. Decisions on the purpose of the processing are clearly always for the controller to make. 40. As regards the determination of means, a distinction can be made between essential and non-essential means. “Essential means” are traditionally and inherently reserved to the controller. While non- essential means can also be determined by the processor, essential means are to be determined by the controller. “Essential means” are means that are closely linked to the purpose and the scope of the processing, such as the type of personal data which are processed (“which data shall be processed?”), the duration of the processing (“for how long shall they be processed?”), the categories of recipients (“who shall have access to them?”) and the categories of data subjects (“whose personal data are being processed?”). Together with the purpose of processing, the essential means are also closely linked to the question of whether the processing is lawful, necessary and proportionate. “Non-essential means” concern more practical aspects of implementation, such as the choice for a particular type of hard- or software or the detailed security measures which may be left to the processor to decide on. Example: Payroll administration Employer A hires another company to administer the payment of salaries to its employees. Employer A gives clear instructions on who to pay, what amounts, by what date, by which bank, how long the data shall be stored, what data should be disclosed to the tax authority etc. In this case, the processing of data is carried out for Company A’s purpose to pay salaries to its employees and the payroll administrator may not use the data for any purpose of its own. The way in which the payroll administrator should carry out the processing is in essence clearly and tightly defined. Nevertheless, the payroll administrator may decide on certain detailed matters around the processing such as which software to use, how to distribute access within its own organisation etc. This does not alter its role as processor as long as the administrator does not go against or beyond the instructions given by Company A. Example: Bank payments As part of the instructions from Employer A, the payroll administration transmits information to Bank B so that they can carry out the actual payment to the employees of Employer A. This activity includes processing of personal data by Bank B which it carries out for the purpose of performing banking activity. Within this activity, the bank decides independently from Employer A on which data that have to be processed to provide the service, for how long the data must be stored etc. Employer A cannot have any influence on the purpose and means of Bank B’s