26 of the GDPR. The situation of joint participation through converging decisions results more particularly from the case law of the CJEU on the concept of joint controllers. Decisions can be considered as converging on purposes and means if they complement each other and are necessary for the processing to take place in such manner that they have a tangible impact on the determination of the purposes and means of the processing. It should be highlighted that the notion of converging decisions needs to be considered in relation to the purposes and means of the processing but not other aspects of the commercial relationship between the parties.19 As such, an important criterion to identify converging decisions in this context is whether the processing would not be possible without both parties’ participation in the purposes and means in the sense that the processing by each party is 19 Indeed, all commercial arrangements involve converging decisions as part of the process by which an agreement is reached. --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted - After public consultation inseparable, i.e. inextricably linked. The situation of joint controllers acting on the basis of converging decisions should however be distinguished from the case of a processor, since the latter – while participating in the performance of a processing – does not process the data for its own purposes but carries out the processing on behalf of the controller. 56. The fact that one of the parties does not have access to personal data processed is not sufficient to exclude joint controllership.20 For example, in Jehovah’s Witnesses, the CJEU considered that a religious community must be considered a controller, jointly with its members who engage in preaching, of the processing of personal data carried out by the latter in the context of door-to-door preaching.21 The CJEU considered that it was not necessary that the community had access to the data in question, or to establish that that community had given its members written guidelines or instructions in relation to the data processing.22 The community participated in the determination of purposes and means by organising and coordinating the activities of its members, which helped to achieve the objective of the Jehovah’s Witnesses community.23 In addition, the community had knowledge on a general level of the fact that such processing was carried out in order to spread its faith.24 57. It is also important to underline, as clarified by the CJEU, that an entity will be considered as joint controller with the other(s) only in respect of those operations for which it determines, jointly with others, the means and the purposes of the same data processing in particular in case of converging decisions. If one of these entities decides alone the purposes and means of operations that precede or are subsequent in the chain of processing, this entity must be considered as the sole controller of this preceding or subsequent operation.25 58. The existence of joint responsibility does not necessarily imply equal responsibility of the various operators involved in the processing of personal data. On the contrary, the CJEU has clarified that those operators may be involved at different stages of that processing and to different degrees so that the level of responsibility of each of them must be assessed with regard to all the relevant circumstances of the particular case. 3.2.2.1 Jointly determined purpose(s) 59. Joint controllership exists when entities involved in the same processing carry out the processing for jointly defined purposes. This will be the case if the entities involved process the data for the same, or common, purposes. 60. In addition, when the entities do not have the same purpose for the processing, joint controllership may also, in light of the CJEU case law, be established when the entities involved pursue purposes which are closely linked or complementary. Such may be the case, for example, when there is a mutual benefit arising from the same processing operation, provided that each of the entities involved participates in the determination of the purposes and means of the relevant processing operation. However, the notion of mutual benefit is not decisive and can only be an indication.. In Fashion ID, for example, the CJEU clarified that a website operator participates in the determination of the purposes 20 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 38. 21 Judgment in Jehovah’s witnesses, C-25/17, ECLI:EU:C:2018:551, paragraph 75. 22 Ibid. 23 Ibid, paragraph 71. 24 Ibid. 25 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, ECLI:EU:2018:1039, paragraph 74 “By contrast, and without prejudice to any civil liability provided for in national law in this respect, that natural or legal person cannot be considered to be a controller, within the meaning of that provision, in the context of operations that precede or are subsequent in the overall chain of processing for which that person does not determine either the purposes or the means”. --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted - After public consultation (and means) of the processing by embedding a social plug-in on a website in order to optimize the publicity of its goods by making them more visible on the social network. The CJEU considered that the processing operations at issue were performed in the economic interests of both the website operator and the provider of the social plug-in.26 61. Likewise, as noted by the CJEU in Wirtschaftsakademie, the processing of personal data through statistics of visitors to a fan page is intended to enable Facebook to improve its system of advertising transmitted via its network and to enable the administrator of the fan page to obtain statistics to manage the promotion of its activity.27 Each entity in this case pursues its own interest but both parties participate in the determination of the purposes (and means) of the processing of personal data as regards the visitors to the fan page.28 62. In this respect, it is important to highlight that the mere existence of a mutual benefit (for ex. commercial) arising from a processing activity does not give rise to joint controllership. If the entity involved in the processing does not pursue any purpose(s) of its own in relation to the processing activity, but is merely being paid for services rendered, it is acting as a processor rather than as a joint controller. 3.2.2.2 Jointly determined means 63. Joint controllership also requires that two or more entities have exerted influence over the means of the processing. This does not mean that, for joint controllership to exist, each entity involved needs in all cases to determine all of the means. Indeed, as clarified by the CJEU, different entities may be involved at different stages of that processing and to different degrees. Different joint controllers may therefore define the means of the processing to a different extent, depending on who is effectively in a position to do so. 64. It may also be the case that one of the entities involved provides the means of the processing and makes it available for personal data processing activities by other entities. The entity who decides to make use of those means so that personal data can be processed for a particular purpose also participates in the determination of the means of the processing. 65. This scenario can notably arise in case of platforms, standardised tools, or other infrastructure allowing the parties to process the same personal data and which have been set up in a certain way by one of the parties to be used by others that can also decide how to set it up.29 The use of an already existing technical system does not exclude joint controllership when users of the system can decide on the processing of personal data to be performed in this context. 66. As an example of this, the CJEU held in Wirtschaftsakademie that the administrator of a fan page hosted on Facebook, by defining parameters based on its target audience and the objectives of managing and promoting its activities, must be regarded as taking part in the determination of the means of the processing of personal data related to the visitors of its fan page. 67. Furthermore, the choice made by an entity to use for its own purposes a tool or other system developed by another entity, allowing the processing of personal data, will likely amount to a joint decision on the means of that processing by those entities. This follows from the Fashion ID case where 26 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, ECLI:EU:2018:1039, paragraph 80. 27 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 34. 28 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 39. 29 The provider of the system can be a joint controller if the criteria mentioned above are met, i.e. if the provider participates in the determination of purposes and means. Otherwise, the provider should be considered as a processor. --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted - After public consultation the CJEU concluded, that by embedding on its website the Facebook Like button made available by Facebook to website operators, Fashion ID has exerted a decisive influence in respect of the operations involving