shared tools. 74 Please also see EDPB guidelines on Personal data breach notification under Regulation 2016/679, WP250.rev.01 which provide that joint controllership will include “determining which party will have responsibility for complying with the obligations under Articles 33 and 34. WP29 recommends that the contractual arrangements between joint controllers include provisions that determine which controller will take the lead on, or be responsible for, compliance with the GDPR’s breach notification obligations”( p.13). 75 Please also see EDPB guidelines on DPIAs, WP248.rev01 which provide the following: “When the processing operation involves joint controllers, they need to define their respective obligations precisely. Their DPIA should set out which party is responsible for the various measures designed to treat risks and to protect the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. Each data controller should express his needs and share useful information without either compromising secrets (e.g.: protection of trade secrets, intellectual property, confidential business information) or disclosing vulnerabilities” (p.7). 76 Each disclosure by a controller requires a lawful basis and assessment of compatibility, regardless of whether the recipient is a separate controller or a joint controller. In other words, the existence of a joint controller relationship does not automatically mean that the joint controller receiving the data can also lawfully process the data for additional purposes which are beyond the scope of joint control. 77 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 43. --- PAGE 46 --- Adopted - After public consultation 170. Another example is the requirement for each joint controller to maintain a record of processing activities or to designate a Data Protection Officer (DPO) if the conditions of Article 37(1) are met. Such requirements are not related to the joint processing but are applicable to them as controllers. 2.2 Allocation of responsibilities needs to be done by way of an arrangement 2.2.1 Form of the arrangement 171. Article 26(1) of the GDPR provides as a new obligation for joint controllers that they should determine their respective responsibilities “by means of an arrangement between them”. The legal form of such arrangement is not specified by the GDPR. Therefore, joint controllers are free to agree on the form of the arrangement. 172. In addition, the arrangement on the allocation of responsibilities is binding upon each of the joint controllers. They each agree and commit vis-à-vis each other on being responsible for complying with the respective obligations stated in their arrangement as their responsibility. 173. Therefore, for the sake of legal certainty, even if there is no legal requirement in the GDPR for a contract or other legal act, the EDPB recommends that such arrangement be made in the form of a binding document such as a contract or other legal binding act under EU or Member State law to which the controllers are subject. This would provide certainty and could be used to evidence transparency and accountability. Indeed, in case of non-compliance with the agreed allocation provided in the arrangement, its binding nature allows one controller to seek the liability of the other for what was stated in the agreement as falling under its responsibility. Also, in line with the accountability principle, the use of a contract or other legal act will allow joint controllers to demonstrate that they comply with the obligations imposed upon them by the GDPR. 174. The way responsibilities, i.e. the tasks, are allocated between each joint controller has to be stated in a clear and plain language in the arrangement.78 This requirement is important as it ensures legal certainty and avoid possible conflicts not only in the relation between the joint controllers but also vis- à-vis the data subjects and the data protection authorities. 175. To better frame the allocation of responsibilities between the parties, the EDPB recommends that the arrangement also provide general information on the joint processing by notably specifying the subject matter and purpose of the processing, the type of personal data, and the categories of data subjects. 2.2.2 Obligations towards data subjects 176. The GDPR provides several obligations of joint controllers towards data subjects: The arrangement shall duly reflect the respective roles and relationships of the joint controllers vis-à- vis the data subjects 177. As a complement to what is explained above in section 2.1 of the present guidelines, it is important that the joint controllers clarify in the arrangement their respective role, “in particular” as regards the exercise of the rights of the data subject and their duties to provide the information referred to in Articles 13 and 14. Article 26 of the GDPR stresses the importance of these specific obligations. The joint controllers must therefore organise and agree on how and by whom the information will be 78 As stated in Recital 79 of the GDPR “(...) the responsibility and liability of controllers and processors, also in relation to the monitoring by and measures of supervisory authorities, requires a clear allocation of the responsibilities under this Regulation, including where a controller determines the purposes and means of the processing jointly with other controllers”. --- PAGE 47 --- Adopted - After public consultation provided and how and by whom the answers to the data subject’s requests will be provided. Irrespective of the content of the arrangement on this specific point, the data subject may contact either of the joint controllers to exercise his or her rights in accordance with Article 26(3) as further explained below. 178. The way these obligations are organised in the arrangement should “duly”, i.e. accurately, reflect the reality of the underlying joint processing. For example, if only one of the joint controllers communicates with the data subjects for the purpose of the joint processing, such controller could be in a better position to inform the data subjects and possibly to answer their requests. The essence of the arrangement shall be made available to the data subject 179. This provision is aimed to ensure that the data subject is aware of the “essence of the arrangement”. For example, it must be completely clear to a data subject which data controller serves as a point of contact for the exercise of data subject rights (notwithstanding the fact that he or she can exercise his or her rights in respect of and against each joint controller). The obligation to make the essence of the arrangement available to data subjects is important in case of joint controllership in order for the data subject to know which of the controllers is responsible for what. 180. What should be covered by the notion of “essence of the arrangement” is not specified by the GDPR. The EDPB recommends that the essence cover at least all the elements of the information referred to in Articles 13 and 14 that should already be accessible to the data subject, and for each of these elements, the arrangement should specify which joint controller is responsible for ensuring compliance with these elements. The essence of the arrangement must also indicate the contact point, if designated. 181. The way such information shall be made available to the data subject is not specified. Contrary to other provisions of the GDPR (such as Article 30(4) for the record of processing or Article 40(11) for the register of approved codes of conduct), Article 26 does not indicate that the availability should be “upon request” nor “publicly available by way of appropriate means”. Therefore, it is up to the joint controllers to decide the most effective way to make the essence of the arrangement available to the data subjects (e.g. together with the information in Article 13 or 14, in the privacy policy or upon request to the data protection officer, if any, or to the contact point that may have been designated). Joint controllers should respectively ensure that the information is provided in a consistent manner. The arrangement may designate a contact point for data subjects 182. Article 26(1) provides the possibility for joint controllers to designate in the arrangement a contact point for data subjects. Such designation is not mandatory. 183. Being informed of a single way to contact possible multiple joint controllers enables data subjects to know who they can contact with regard to all issues related to the processing of their personal data. In addition, it allows multiple joint controllers to coordinate in a more efficient manner their relations and communications vis-à-vis data subjects. 184. For these reasons, in order to facilitate the exercise of data subjects’ rights under the GDPR, the EDPB recommends joint controllers to designate such contact point. 185. The contact point can be the DPO, if any, the representative in the Union (for joint controllers not established in the Union) or any other contact point where information can be obtained. --- PAGE 48 --- Adopted - After public consultation Irrespective of the terms of the arrangement, data subjects may exercise their rights in respect of and against each of the joint controllers. 186. Under Article 26(3), a data subject is not bound by the terms of the arrangement and may exercise his or her rights under the