department within a company cannot be a processor to another department within the same entity. 78. If the controller decides to process data itself, using its own resources within its organisation, for example through its own staff, this is not a processor situation. Employees and other persons that are acting under the direct authority of the controller, such as temporarily employed staff, are not to be seen as processors since they will process personal data as a part of the controller’s entity. In accordance with Article 29, they are also bound by the controller’s instructions. 79. Processing personal data on the controller’s behalf firstly requires that the separate entity processes personal data for the benefit of the controller. In Article 4(2), processing is defined as a concept including a wide array of operations ranging from collection, storage and consultation to use, dissemination or otherwise making available and destruction.. The concept of “processing” is further described above under 2.1.5. 80. Secondly, the processing must be done on behalf of a controller but otherwise than under its direct authority or control. Acting “on behalf of” means serving someone else’s interest and recalls the legal concept of “delegation”. In the case of data protection law, a processor is called to implement the instructions given by the controller at least with regard to the purpose of the processing and the essential elements of the means. The lawfulness of the processing according to Article 6, and if relevant Article 9, of the Regulation will be derived from the controller’s activity and the processor must not process the data otherwise than according to the controller’s instructions. Even so, as described above, the controller’s instructions may still leave a certain degree of discretion about how to best serve the controller’s interests, allowing the processor to choose the most suitable technical and organisational means.32 81. Acting “on behalf of” also means that the processor may not carry out processing for its own purpose(s). As provided in Article 28(10), a processor infringes the GDPR by going beyond the controller’s instructions and starting to determine its own purposes and means of processing. The processor will be considered a controller in respect of that processing and may be subject to sanctions for going beyond the controller’s instructions. Example: Service provider referred to as data processor but acting as controller Service provider MarketinZ provides promotional advertisement and direct marketing services to various companies. Company GoodProductZ concludes a contract with MarketinZ, according to which the latter company provides commercial advertising for GoodProductZ customers and is referred to as data processor. However, MarketinZ decides to use GoodProducts customer database also for other purposes than advertising for GoodProducts, such as developing their own business activity. The decision to add an additional purpose to the one for which the personal data were transferred converts MarketinZ into a data controller for this set of processing operations and their processing for this purpose would constitute an infringement of the GDPR. 82. The EDPB recalls that not every service provider that processes personal data in the course of delivering a service is a “processor” within the meaning of the GDPR. The role of a processor does not stem from the nature of an entity that is processing data but from its concrete activities in a specific context. In other words, the same entity may act at the same time as a controller for certain processing 32 See Part I, sub-section 2.1.4 describing the distinction between essential and non-essential means. --- PAGE 27 --- Adopted - After public consultation operations and as a processor for others, and the qualification as controller or processor has to be assessed with regard to specific sets of data or operations. The nature of the service will determine whether the processing activity amounts to processing of personal data on behalf of the controller within the meaning of the GDPR. In practice, where the provided service is not specifically targeted at processing personal data or where such processing does not constitute a key element of the service, the service provider may be in a position to independently determine the purposes and means of that processing which is required in order to provide the service. In that situation, the service provider is to be seen as a separate controller and not as a processor.33 A case-by-case analysis remains necessary, however, in order to ascertain the degree of influence each entity effectively has in determining the purposes and means of the processing. Example: Taxi service A taxi service offers an online platform which allows companies to book a taxi to transport employees or guests to and from the airport. When booking a taxi, Company ABC specifies the name of the employee that should be picked up from the airport so the driver can confirm the employee’s identity at the moment of pick-up. In this case, the taxi service processes personal data of the employee as part of its service to Company ABC, but the processing as such is not the target of the service. The taxi service has designed the online booking platform as part of developing its own business activity to provide transportation services, without any instructions from Company ABC. The taxi service also independently determines the categories of data it collects and how long it retains. The taxi service therefore acts as a controller in its own right, notwithstanding the fact that the processing takes place following a request for service from Company ABC. 83. The EDPB notes that a service provider may still be acting as a processor even if the processing of personal data is not the main or primary object of the service, provided that the customer of the service still determines the purposes and means of the processing in practice. When considering whether or not to entrust the processing of personal data to a particular service provider, controllers should carefully assess whether the service provider in question allows them to exercise a sufficient degree of control, taking into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as well as the potential risks for data subjects. Example: Call center Company X outsources its client support to Company Y who provides a call center in order to help Company X’s clients with their questions. The client support service means that Company Y has to have access to Company X client data bases. Company Y can only access data in order to provide the support that Company X has procured and they cannot process data for any other purposes than the ones stated by Company X. Company Y is to be seen as a personal data processor and a processor agreement must be concluded between Company X and Y. Example: General IT support Company Z hires an IT service provider to perform general support on its IT systems which include a vast amount of personal data. The access to personal data is not the main object of the support service but it is inevitable that the IT service provider systematically has access to personal data when 33 See also Recital 81 of the GDPR, which refers to “entrusting a processor processing activities”, indicating that the processing activity as such is an important part of the decision of the controller to ask a processor to process personal data on its behalf. --- PAGE 28 --- Adopted - After public consultation performing the service. Company Z therefore concludes that the IT service provider - being a separate company and inevitably being required to process personal data even though this is not the main objective of the service – is to be regarded as a processor. A processor agreement is therefore concluded with the IT service provider. Example: IT-consultant fixing a software bug Company ABC hires an IT-specialist from another company to fix a bug in a software that is being used by the company. The IT-consultant is not hired to process personal data, and Company ABC determines that any access to personal data will be purely incidental and therefore very limited in practice. ABC therefore concludes that the IT-specialist is not a processor (nor a controller in its own right) and that Company ABC will take appropriate measures according to Article 32 of the GDPR in order to prevent the IT-consultant from processing personal data in an unauthorised manner. 84. As stated above, nothing prevents the processor from offering a preliminarily defined service but the controller must make the final decision to actively approve the way the processing is carried out, at least insofar as concerns the essential means of the processing. As stated above, a processor has a margin of manoeuvre as regards non-essential means, see above under sub-section 2.1.4. Example: Cloud service provider A municipality has decided to use a cloud service provider for handling information in its school and education services. The cloud service provides messaging services, videoconferences, storage of documents, calendar management, word processing etc. and will entail processing of personal data about school children and teachers. The cloud service provider has