is not necessary for the contract to include exactly the same words as those used in the contract between the controller and the processor, but it should ensure that the obligations in substance are the same. This also means that if the processor entrusts the sub-processor with a specific part of the processing, to which some of the obligations cannot apply, such obligations should not be included “by default” in the contract with the sub-processor, as this would only generate uncertainty. As an example, as to assistance with data breach related obligations, notification of a data breach by a sub-processor directly to the controller could be done if all three agree. However, in the case of such direct notification the processor should be informed and get a copy of the notification. 2 CONSEQUENCES OF JOINT CONTROLLERSHIP 2.1 Determining in a transparent manner the respective responsibilities of joint controllers for compliance with the obligations under the GDPR 161. Article 26(1) of the GDPR provides that joint controllers shall in a transparent manner determine and agree on their respective responsibilities for compliance with the obligations under the Regulation. 162. Joint controllers thus need to set “who does what” by deciding between themselves who will have to carry out which tasks in order to make sure that the processing complies with the applicable obligations under the GDPR in relation to the joint processing at stake. In other words, a distribution of responsibilities for compliance is to be made as resulting from the use of the term “respective” in 71 This duty of the controller stems from the accountability principle in Article 24 and from the obligation to comply with provisions of Articles 28(1), 32 and Chapter V of the GDPR. --- PAGE 44 --- Adopted - After public consultation Article 26(1). This does not preclude the fact that EU or Member State law may already set out certain responsibilities of each joint controller. Where this is the case, the joint controller arrangement should also address any additional responsibilities necessary to ensure compliance with the GDPR that are not addressed by the legal provisions.72 163. The objective of these rules is to ensure that where multiple actors are involved, especially in complex data processing environments, responsibility for compliance with data protection rules is clearly allocated in order to avoid that the protection of personal data is reduced, or that a negative conflict of competence lead to loopholes whereby some obligations are not complied with by any of the parties involved in the processing. It should be made clear here that all responsibilities have to be allocated according to the factual circumstances in order to achieve an operative agreement. The EDPB observes that there are situations occurring in which the influence of one joint controller and its factual influence complicate the achievement of an agreement. However, those circumstances do not negate the joint controllership and cannot serve to exempt either party from its obligations under the GDPR. 164. More specifically, Article 26(1) specifies that the determination of their respective responsibilities (i.e. tasks) for compliance with the obligations under the GDPR is to be carried out by joint controllers “in particular” as regards the exercising of the rights of the data subject and the duties to provide information referred in Articles 13 and 14, unless and in so far as the respective responsibilities of the controllers are determined by Union or Member State law to which the controllers are subject. 165. It is clear from this provision that joint controllers need to define who respectively will be in charge of answering to requests when data subjects exercise their rights granted by the GDPR and of providing information to them as required by Articles 13 and 14 of the GDPR. This only refers to defining in their internal relationship which of the parties is obligated to respond to which data subjects’ requests. . Regardless of any such arrangement, the data subject may contact either of the joint controllers in accordance with Article 26 (3) GPDR. However, the use of the terms “in particular” indicates that the obligations subject to the allocation of responsibilities for compliance by each party involved as referred in this provision are non-exhaustive. It follows that the distribution of the responsibilities for compliance among joint controllers is not limited to the topics referred in Article 26(1) but extends to other controller’s obligations under the GDPR. Indeed, joint controllers need to ensure that the whole joint processing fully complies with the GDPR. 166. In this perspective, the compliance measures and related obligations joint controllers should consider when determining their respective responsibilities, in addition to those specifically referred in Article 26(1), include amongst others without limitation:  Implementation of general data protection principles (Article 5)  Legal basis of the processing73 (Article 6)  Security measures (Article 32) 72 "In any event, the joint controller arrangement should comprehensively address all of the responsibilities of the joint controllers, including those which may have already been set out in the relevant EU or Member State law and without prejudice to the obligation of joint controllers to make available the essence of the joint controller arrangement in accordance with Article 26(2) GDPR." 73 Although the GDPR does not preclude joint controllers to use different legal basis for different processing operations they carry out, it is recommended to use, whenever possible, the same legal basis for a particular purpose. --- PAGE 45 --- Adopted - After public consultation  Notification of a personal data breach to the supervisory authority and to the data subject74 (Articles 33 and 34)  Data Protection Impact Assessments (Articles 35 and 36)75  The use of a processor (Article 28)  Transfers of data to third countries (Chapter V)  Organisation of contact with data subjects and supervisory authorities 167. Other topics that could be considered depending on the processing at stake and the intention of the parties are for instance the limitations on the use of personal data for another purpose by one of the joint controllers. In this respect, both controllers always have a duty to ensure that they both have a legal basis for the processing. Sometimes, in the context of joint controllership, personal data are shared by one controller to another. As a matter of accountability, each controller has the duty to ensure that the data are not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with the purposes for which they were originally collected by the controller sharing the data.76 168. Joint controllers can have a certain degree of flexibility in distributing and allocating obligations among them as long as they ensure full compliance with the GDPR with respect of the given processing. The allocation should take into account factors such as, who is competent and in a position to effectively ensure data subject’s rights as well as to comply with the relevant obligations under the GDPR. The EDPB recommends documenting the relevant factors and the internal analysis carried out in order to allocate the different obligations. This analysis is part of the documentation under the accountability principle. 169. The obligations do not need to be equally distributed among the joint controllers. In this respect, the CJEU has recently stated that “the existence of joint responsibility does not necessarily imply equal responsibility of the various operators involved in the processing of personal data”.77 However, there may be cases where not all of the obligations can be distributed and all joint controllers may need to comply with the same requirements arising from the GDPR, taking into account the nature and context of the joint processing. For instance, joint controllers using shared data processing tools or systems both need to ensure compliance with notably the purpose limitation principle and implement appropriate measures to ensure the security of personal data processed under the shared tools. 74 Please also see EDPB guidelines on Personal data breach notification under Regulation 2016/679, WP250.rev.01 which provide that joint controllership will include “determining which party will have responsibility for complying with the obligations under Articles 33 and 34. WP29 recommends that the contractual arrangements between joint controllers include provisions that determine which controller will take the lead on, or be responsible for, compliance with the GDPR’s breach notification obligations”( p.13). 75 Please also see EDPB guidelines on DPIAs, WP248.rev01 which provide the following: “When the processing operation involves joint controllers, they need to define their respective obligations precisely. Their DPIA should set out which party is responsible for the various measures designed to treat risks and to protect the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. Each data controller should express his needs and share useful information without either compromising secrets (e.g.: protection of trade secrets, intellectual property, confidential business information) or disclosing vulnerabilities” (p.7). 76 Each disclosure by a controller requires a lawful basis and assessment of compatibility, regardless of whether the recipient is a separate controller or a joint controller. In other words, the existence of a joint controller relationship does not automatically mean that the