and abide by administrative orders. At the same time, it should be recalled that processors must always comply with, and act only on, instructions from the controller. 10. The accountability principle, together with the other, more specific rules on how to comply with the GDPR and the distribution of responsibility, therefore makes it necessary to define the different roles of several actors involved in a personal data processing activity. 3 Article 29 Working Party Opinion 3/2010 on the principle of accountability adopted on 13 July 2010, 00062/10/EN WP 173. 4 Recital 74 GDPR. --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted - After public consultation 11. A general observation regarding the concepts of controller and processor in the GDPR is that they have not changed compared to the Directive 95/46/EC and that overall, the criteria for how to attribute the different roles remain the same. 12. The concepts of controller and processor are functional concepts: they aim to allocate responsibilities according to the actual roles of the parties.5This implies that the legal status of an actor as either a “controller” or a “processor” must in principle be determined by its actual activities in a specific situation, rather than upon the formal designation of an actor as being either a “controller” or “processor” (e.g. in a contract).6 This means that the allocation of the roles usually should stem from an analysis of the factual elements or circumstances of the case and as such is not negotiable. 13. The concepts of controller and processor are also autonomous concepts in the sense that, although external legal sources can help identifying who is a controller, it should be interpreted mainly according to EU data protection law. The concept of controller should not be prejudiced by other - sometimes colliding or overlapping - concepts in other fields of law, such as the creator or the right holder in intellectual property rights or competition law. 14. As the underlying objective of attributing the role of controller is to ensure accountability and the effective and comprehensive protection of the personal data, the concept of ‘controller’ should be interpreted in a sufficiently broad way, favouring as much as possible effective and complete protection of data subjects7 so as to ensure full effect of EU data protection law, to avoid lacunae and to prevent possible circumvention of the rules, while at the same time not diminishing the role of the processor. 2 DEFINITION OF CONTROLLER 2.1 Definition of controller 15. A controller is defined by Article 4(7) GDPR as “the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data; where the purposes and means of such processing are determined by Union or Member State law, the controller or the specific criteria for its nomination may be provided for by Union or Member State law”. 16. The definition of controller contains five main building blocks, which will be analysed separately for the purposes of these Guidelines. They are the following:  “the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body” 5 Article 29 Working Party Opinion 1/2010, WP 169, p. 9. 6 See also the Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi, in Jehovah’s witnesses, C-25/17, ECLI:EU:C:2018:57, paragraph 68 (“For the purposes of determining the ‘controller’ within the meaning of Directive 95/46, I am inclined to consider [....] that excessive formalism would make it easy to circumvent the provisions of Directive 95/46 and that, consequently, it is necessary to rely upon a more factual than formal analysis [...].”) 7 CJEU, Case C-131/12, Google Spain SL and Google Inc. v Agencia Española de Protección de Datos (AEPD) and Mario Costeja González, judgment of 13 May 2014, paragraph 34; CJEU, Case C-210/16, Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig-Holstein, judgment of 5 June 2018, paragraph 28; CJEU, Case C-40/17, Fashion ID GmbH & Co.KG v Verbraucherzentrale NRW eV, judgment of 29 July 2019, paragraph 66. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted - After public consultation  “determines”  “alone or jointly with others”  “the purposes and means”  “of the processing of personal data”. 2.1.1 “Natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body” 17. The first building block relates to the type of entity that can be a controller. Under the GDPR, a controller can be “a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body”. This means that, in principle, there is no limitation as to the type of entity that may assume the role of a controller. It might be an organisation, but it might also be an individual or a group of individuals.8 In practice, however, it is usually the organisation as such, and not an individual within the organisation (such as the CEO, an employee or a member of the board), that acts as a controller within the meaning of the GDPR. As far as data processing within a company group is concerned, special attention must be paid to the question of whether an establishment may be acting as a controller or processor, e.g. when processing data on behalf of the parent company. 18. Sometimes, companies and public bodies appoint a specific person responsible for the implementation of the processing activity. Even if a specific natural person is appointed to ensure compliance with data protection rules, this person will not be the controller but will act on behalf of the legal entity (company or public body) which will be ultimately responsible in case of infringement of the rules in its capacity as controller. In the same vein, even if a particular department or unit of an organisation has operational responsibility for ensuring compliance for certain processing activity, it does not mean that this department or unit (rather than the organisation as a whole) becomes the controller. Example: The marketing department of Company ABC launches an advertising campaign to promote ABC’s products. The marketing department decides the nature of campaign, the means to be used (e-mail, social media ...), which customers to target and what data to use in order to make the campaign as successful as possible. Even if the marketing department acted with considerable independence, Company ABC will in principle be considered as the controller seeing as the advertising campaign is launched by the company and takes place within the realm of its business activities and for its purposes. 19. In principle, any processing of personal data by employees which takes place within the realm of activities of an organisation may be presumed to take place under that organisation’s control.9 In exceptional circumstances, however, it may occur that an employee decides to use personal data for his or her own purposes, thereby unlawfully exceeding the authority that he or she was given. (e.g. to set up his own company or similar). It is therefore the organisation’s duty as controller to make sure 8 For example, in its Judgment in Jehovah’s witnesses, C-25/17, ECLI:EU:C:2018:551, paragraph 75, the CJEU considered that a religious community of Jehovah’s witnesses acted as a controller, jointly with its individual members. Judgment in Jehovah’s witnesses, C-25/17, ECLI:EU:C:2018:551, paragraph 75. 9 Employees who have access to personal data within an organisation are generally not considered as “controllers” or “processors”, but rather as “persons acting under the authority of the controller or of the processor” within the meaning of article 29 GDPR. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted - After public consultation that there are adequate technical and organizational measures, including e.g. training and information to employees, to ensure compliance with the GDPR. 10 2.1.2 “Determines” 20. The second building block of the controller concept refers to the controller’s influence over the processing, by virtue of an exercise of decision-making power. A controller is a body that decides certain key elements about the processing. This controllership may be defined by law or may stem from an analysis of the factual elements or circumstances of the case. One should look at the specific processing operations in question and understand who determines them, by first considering the following questions: "why is this processing taking place?” and “who decided that the processing should take place for a particular purpose?”. Circumstances giving rise to control 21. Having said that the concept of controller is a functional concept, it is therefore based on a factual rather than a formal analysis. In order to facilitate the analysis, certain rules of thumb and practical presumptions may be used to guide and simplify the process. In most situations, the "determining body" can be easily and clearly identified by reference to certain legal and/or factual circumstances from which “influence” normally can be inferred, unless other elements indicate the contrary. Two categories of situations can be distinguished: (1) control stemming from legal provisions; and (2) control stemming from factual influence. 1) Control stemming from legal provisions 22. There are cases where control can be inferred from explicit legal competence e.g., when the controller or the specific criteria for its nomination are designated by national or Union law. Indeed, Article 4(7) states that “where the