a written processing agreement. This would, however, imply a violation of Article 28(3) GDPR. Moreover, in certain circumstances, the absence of a clear definition of the relationship between the controller and the processor may raise the problem of the lack of legal basis on which every processing should be based, e.g. in respect of the communication of data between the controller and the alleged processor. 43 Article 28(3) is not only applicable to controllers. In the situation where only the processor is subject to the territorial scope of the GDPR, the obligation shall only be directly applicable to the processor, see also EDPB Guidelines 3/2018 on the territorial scope of the GDPR, p. 12. 44 Article 28(6) GDPR. The EDPB recalls that standard contractual clauses for the purposes of compliance with Article 28 GDPR are not the same as standard contractual clauses referred to in Article 46(2). While the former further stipulate and clarify how the provisions of Article 28(3) and (4) will be fulfilled, the latter provide appropriate safeguards in case of transfer of personal data to a third country or an international organisation in the absence of an adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45(3). --- PAGE 33 --- Adopted - After public consultation 105. A set of standard contractual clauses (SCCs) may be, alternatively, adopted by the Commission45 or adopted by a supervisory authority, in accordance with the consistency mechanism.46 These clauses could be part of a certification granted to the controller or processor pursuant to Articles 42 or 43.47 106. The EDPB would like to clarify that there is no obligation for controllers and processors to enter into a contract based on SCCs, nor is it to be necessarily preferred over negotiating an individual contract. Both options are viable for the purposes of compliance with data protection law, depending on the specific circumstances, as long as they meet the Article 28(3) requirements. 107. If the parties wish to take advantage of standard contractual clauses, the data protection clauses of their agreement must be the same as those of the SCCs. The SCCs will often leave some blank spaces to be filled in or options to be selected by the parties. Also, as also mentioned above, the SCCs will generally be embedded in a larger agreement describing the object of the contract, its financial conditions, and other agreed clauses: it will be possible for the parties to add additional clauses (e.g. applicable law and jurisdiction) as long as they do not contradict, directly or indirectly, the SCCs48 and they do not undermine the protection afforded by the GDPR and EU or Member State data protection laws. 108. Contracts between controllers and processors may sometimes be drafted unilaterally by one of the parties. Which party or parties that draft the contract may depend on several factors, including: the parties’ position in the market and contractual power, their technical expertise, as well as access to legal services. For instance, some service providers tend to set up standard terms and conditions, which include data processing agreements. 109. An agreement between the controller and processor must comply with the requirements of Article 28 GDPR in order to ensure that the processor processes personal data in compliance with the GDPR. Any such agreement should take into account the specific responsibilities of controllers and processors. Although Article 28 provides a list of points which must be addressed in any contract governing the relationship between controllers and processors it leaves room for negotiations between the parties to such contracts. In some situations a controller or a processor may be in a weaker negotiation power to customize the data protection agreement. Reliance on the standard contractual clauses adopted pursuant to Article 28 (subparagraphs 7 and 8) may contribute to rebalancing the negotiating positions and to ensure that the contracts respect the GDPR. 45 Article 28(7) GDPR. Article 28(7) GDPR. Article 28(7) GDPR. Article 28(7) GDPR. See the EDPB-EDPS Joint Opinion 1/2021 on standard contractual clauses between controllers and processors: https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/edpbedps-joint-opinion/edpb-edps-joint-opinion- 12021-standard en. 46 Article 28(8) GDPR. The Register for Decisions taken by supervisory authorities and courts on issues handled in the consistency mechanism, including standard contractual clauses for the purposes of compliance with Art. 28 GDPR, can be accessed here: https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/consistency-findings/register-for- decisions en. 47 Article 28(6) GDPR. 48 The EDPB recalls that the same degree of flexibility is allowed when the parties choose to use SCCs as appropriate safeguard for transfers to third countries pursuant to Article 46(2)(c) or Article 46(2)(d) GDPR. Recital 109 GDPR clarifies that “The possibility for the controller or processor to use standard data-protection clauses adopted by the Commission or by a supervisory authority should prevent controllers or processors neither from including the standard data-protection clauses in a wider contract, such as a contract between the processor and another processor, nor from adding other clauses or additional safeguards provided that they do not contradict, directly or indirectly, the standard contractual clauses [...] or prejudice the fundamental rights or freedoms of the data subjects. Controllers and processors should be encouraged to provide additional safeguards via contractual commitments that supplement standard protection clauses”. --- PAGE 34 --- Adopted - After public consultation 110. The fact that the contract and its detailed terms of business are prepared by the service provider rather than by the controller is not in itself problematic and is not in itself a sufficient basis to conclude that the service provider should be considered as a controller. Also, the imbalance in the contractual power of a small data controller with respect to big service providers should not be considered as a justification for the controller to accept clauses and terms of contracts which are not in compliance with data protection law, nor can it discharge the controller from its data protection obligations. The controller must evaluate the terms and in so far as it freely accepts them and makes use of the service, it has also accepted full responsibility for compliance with the GDPR. Any proposed modification, by a processor, of data processing agreements included in standard terms and conditions should be directly notified to and approved by the controller, bearing in mind the degree of leeway that the processor enjoys with respect to non-essential elements of the means (see paragraphs 40-41 above). The mere publication of these modifications on the processor’s website is not compliant with Article 28. 1.3 Content of the contract or other legal act 111. Before focusing on each of the detailed requirements set out by the GDPR as to the content of the contract or other legal act, some general remarks are necessary. 112. While the elements laid down by Article 28 of the Regulation constitute its core content, the contract should be a way for the controller and the processor to further clarify how such core elements are going to be implemented with detailed instructions. Therefore, the processing agreement should not merely restate the provisions of the GDPR: rather, it should include more specific, concrete information as to how the requirements will be met and which level of security is required for the personal data processing that is the object of the processing agreement. Far from being a pro-forma exercise, the negotiation and stipulation of the contract are a chance to specify details regarding the processing.49 Indeed, the “protection of the rights and freedoms of data subjects as well as the responsibility and liability of controllers and processors [...] requires a clear allocation of the responsibilities” under the GDPR.50 113. At the same time, the contract should take into account “the specific tasks and responsibilities of the processor in the context of the processing to be carried out and the risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subject”.51 Generally speaking, the contract between the parties should be drafted in light of the specific data processing activity. For instance, there is no need to impose particularly stringent protections and procedures on a processor entrusted with a processing activity from which only minor risks arise: while each processor must comply with the requirements set out by the Regulation, the measures and procedures should be tailored to the specific situation. In any event, all elements of Article 28(3) must be covered by the contract. At the same time, the contract should include some elements that may help the processor in understanding the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects arising from the processing: because the activity is performed on behalf of the controller, often the controller has a deeper understanding of the risks that the processing entails since the controller is aware of the circumstances in which the processing is embedded. 114. Moving on to the required content of the contract or other legal act, EDPB interprets Article 28(3) in a way that it needs to set out: 49 See also EDPB Opinion 14/2019 on the draft Standard Contractual Clauses submitted by the DK SA (Article 28(8) GDPR), p. 5. 50 Recital 79 GDPR. 51 Recital 81 GDPR. --- PAGE 35 --- Adopted -