parameters based on its target audience and the objectives of managing and promoting its activities, must be regarded as taking part in the determination of the means of the processing of personal data related to the visitors of its fan page. 67. Furthermore, the choice made by an entity to use for its own purposes a tool or other system developed by another entity, allowing the processing of personal data, will likely amount to a joint decision on the means of that processing by those entities. This follows from the Fashion ID case where 26 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, ECLI:EU:2018:1039, paragraph 80. 27 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 34. 28 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388, paragraph 39. 29 The provider of the system can be a joint controller if the criteria mentioned above are met, i.e. if the provider participates in the determination of purposes and means. Otherwise, the provider should be considered as a processor. --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted - After public consultation the CJEU concluded, that by embedding on its website the Facebook Like button made available by Facebook to website operators, Fashion ID has exerted a decisive influence in respect of the operations involving the collection and transmission of the personal data of the visitors of its website to Facebook and had thus jointly determined with Facebook the means of that processing.30 68. It is important to underline that the use of a common data processing system or infrastructure will not in all cases lead to qualify the parties involved as joint controllers, in particular where the processing they carry out is separable and could be performed by one party without intervention from the other or where the provider is a processor in the absence of any purpose of its own (the existence of a mere commercial benefit for the parties involved is not sufficient to qualify as a purpose of processing). Example: Travel agency A travel agency sends personal data of its customers to the airline and a chain of hotels, with a view to making reservations for a travel package. The airline and the hotel confirm the availability of the seats and rooms requested. The travel agency issues the travel documents and vouchers for its customers. Each of the actors processes the data for carrying out their own activities and using their own means. In this case, the travel agency, the airline and the hotel are three different data controllers processing the data for their own and separate purposes and there is no joint controllership. The travel agency, the hotel chain and the airline then decide to participate jointly in setting up an internet-based common platform for the common purpose of providing package travel deals. They agree on the essential means to be used, such as which data will be stored, how reservations will be allocated and confirmed, and who can have access to the information stored. Furthermore, they decide to share the data of their customers in order to carry out joint marketing actions. In this case, the travel agency, the airline and the hotel chain, jointly determine why and how personal data of their respective customers are processed and will therefore be joint controllers with regard to the processing operations relating to the common internet-based booking platform and the joint marketing actions. However, each of them would still retain sole control with regard to other processing activities outside the internet-based common platform. Example: Research project by institutes Several research institutes decide to participate in a specific joint research project and to use to that end the existing platform of one of the institutes involved in the project. Each institute feeds personal data it already holds into the platform for the purpose of the joint research and uses the data provided by others through the platform for carrying out the research. In this case, all institutes qualify as joint controllers for the personal data processing that is done by storing and disclosing information from this platform since they have decided together the purpose of the processing and the means to be used (the existing platform). Each of the institutes however is a separate controller for any other processing that may be carried out outside the platform for their respective purposes. Example: Marketing operation Companies A and B have launched a co-branded product C and wish to organise an event to promote this product. To that end, they decide to share data from their respective clients and prospects 30 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, ECLI:EU:2018:1039, paragraphs 77-79. --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted - After public consultation database and decide on the list of invitees to the event on this basis. They also agree on the modalities for sending the invitations to the event, how to collect feedback during the event and follow-up marketing actions. Companies A and B can be considered as joint controllers for the processing of personal data related to the organisation of the promotional event as they decide together on the jointly defined purpose and essential means of the data processing in this context. Example: Clinical Trials31 A health care provider (the investigator) and a university (the sponsor) decide to launch together a clinical trial with the same purpose. They collaborate together to the drafting of the study protocol (i.e. purpose, methodology/design of the study, data to be collected, subject exclusion/inclusion criteria, database reuse (where relevant) etc.). They may be considered as joint controllers, for this clinical trial as they jointly determine and agree on the same purpose and the essential means of the processing. The collection of personal data from the medical record of the patient for the purpose of research is to be distinguished from the storage and use of the same data for the purpose of patient care, for which the health care provider remains the controller. In the event that the investigator does not participate to the drafting of the protocol (he just accepts the protocol already elaborated by the sponsor), and the protocol is only designed by the sponsor, the investigator should be considered as a processor and the sponsor as the controller for this clinical trial. Example: Headhunters Company X helps Company Y in recruiting new staff- with its famous value-added service "global matchz". Company X looks for suitable candidates both among the CVs received directly by Company Y and those it already has in its own database. Such database is created and managed by Company X on its own. This ensures that Company X enhances the matching between job offers and job seekers, thus increasing its revenues. Even though they have not formally taken a decision together, Companies X and Y jointly participate to the processing with the purpose of finding suitable candidates based on converging decisions: the decision to create and manage the service “global matchz” for Company X and the decision of Company Y to enrich the database with the CVs it directly receives. Such decisions complement each other, are inseparable and necessary for the processing of finding suitable candidates to take place. Therefore, in this particular case they should be considered as joint controllers of such processing. However, Company X is the sole controller of the processing necessary to manage its database and Company Y is the sole controller of the subsequent hiring processing for its own purpose (organisation of interviews, conclusion of the contract and management of HR data). Example: Analysis of health data Company ABC, the developer of a blood pressure monitoring app and Company XYZ, a provider of apps for medical professionals, both wish to examine how blood pressure changes can help predict certain diseases. The companies decide to set up a joint project and reach out to Hospital DEF to become involved as well. The personal data that will be processed in this project consists of personal data which Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ are separately processing as individual controllers. The decision to 31 The EDPB plans to provide further guidance in relation to clinical trials in the context of its forthcoming Guidelines on processing of personal data for medical and scientific research purposes. --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted - After public consultation process this data to assess blood pressure changes is taken jointly by the three actors. Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ have jointly determined the purposes of processing. Company XYZ takes the initiative to propose the essential means of processing. Both Company ABC and the Hospital DEF accept these essential means after they as well were involved in developing some of the features of the app so that the results can be sufficiently used by them. The three organizations thus agree on having a common purpose for the processing which is the assessment of how blood pressure changes can help predict certain diseases. Once the research is completed, Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ may benefit from the assessment by using its results in their own activities. For all these reasons, they qualify as joint controllers for this