of personal data which Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ are separately processing as individual controllers. The decision to 31 The EDPB plans to provide further guidance in relation to clinical trials in the context of its forthcoming Guidelines on processing of personal data for medical and scientific research purposes. --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted - After public consultation process this data to assess blood pressure changes is taken jointly by the three actors. Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ have jointly determined the purposes of processing. Company XYZ takes the initiative to propose the essential means of processing. Both Company ABC and the Hospital DEF accept these essential means after they as well were involved in developing some of the features of the app so that the results can be sufficiently used by them. The three organizations thus agree on having a common purpose for the processing which is the assessment of how blood pressure changes can help predict certain diseases. Once the research is completed, Company ABC, Hospital DEF and Company XYZ may benefit from the assessment by using its results in their own activities. For all these reasons, they qualify as joint controllers for this specific joint processing. If Company XYZ had been simply asked by the others to perform this assessment without having any purpose of their own and merely been processing data on behalf of the others, Company XYZ would qualify as a processor even if it was entrusted with the determination of the non-essential means. 3.2.3 Situations where there is no joint controllership 69. The fact that several actors are involved in the same processing does not mean that they are necessarily acting as joint controllers of such processing. Not all kind of partnerships, cooperation or collaboration imply qualification of joint controllers as such qualification requires a case-by-case analysis of each processing at stake and the precise role of each entity with respect to each processing. The cases below provide non-exhaustive examples of situations where there is no joint controllership. 70. For example, the exchange of the same data or set of data between two entities without jointly determined purposes or jointly determined means of processing should be considered as a transmission of data between separate controllers. Example: Transmission of employee data to tax authorities A company collects and processes personal data of its employees with the purpose of managing salaries, health insurances, etc. A law imposes an obligation on the company to send all data concerning salaries to the tax authorities, with a view to reinforce fiscal control. In this case, even though both the company and the tax authorities process the same data concerning salaries, the lack of jointly determined purposes and means with regard to this data processing will result in qualifying the two entities as two separate data controllers. 71. Joint controllership may also be excluded in a situation where several entities use a shared database or a common infrastructure, if each entity independently determines its own purposes. Example: Marketing operations in a group of companies using a shared database: A group of companies uses the same database for the management of clients and prospects. Such database is hosted on the servers of the mother company who is therefore a processor of the companies with respect to the storage of the data. Each entity of the group enters the data of its own clients and prospects and processes such data for its own purposes only. Also, each entity decides independently on the access, the retention periods, the correction or deletion of their clients and prospects’ data. They cannot access or use each other’s data. The mere fact that these companies use a shared group database does not as such entail joint controllership. Under these circumstances, each company is thus a separate controller. Example: Independent controllers when using a shared infrastructure --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted - After public consultation Company XYZ hosts a database and makes it available to other companies to process and host personal data about their employees. Company XYZ is a processor in relation to the processing and storage of other companies’ employees as these operations are performed on behalf and according to the instructions of these other companies. In addition, the other companies process the data without any involvement from Company XYZ and for purposes which are not in any way shared by Company XYZ. 72. Also, there can be situations where various actors successively process the same personal data in a chain of operations, each of these actors having an independent purpose and independent means in their part of the chain. In the absence of joint participation in the determination of the purposes and means of the same processing operation or set of operations, joint controllership has to be excluded and the various actors must be regarded as successive independent controllers. Example: Statistical analysis for a task of public interest A public authority (Authority A) has the legal task of making relevant analysis and statistics on how the country’s employment rate develops. To do that, many other public entities are legally bound to disclose specific data to Authority A. Authority A decides to use a specific system to process the data, including collection. This also means that the other units are obligated to use the system for their disclosure of data. In this case, without prejudice to any attribution of roles by law, Authority A will be the only controller of the processing for the purpose of analysis and statistics of the employment rate processed in the system, because Authority A determines the purpose for the processing, and has decided how the processing will be organised. Of course, the other public entities, as controllers for their own processing activities, are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of the data they previously processed, which they then disclose to Authority A. 4 DEFINITION OF PROCESSOR 73. A processor is defined in Article 4 (8) as a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, which processes personal data on behalf of the controller. Similar to the definition of controller, the definition of processor envisages a broad range of actors - it can be “a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body”. This means that there is in principle no limitation as to which type of actor might assume the role of a processor. It might be an organisation, but it might also be an individual. 74. The GDPR lays down obligations directly applicable specifically to processors as further specified in Part II section 1 of these guidelines. A processor can be held liable or fined in case of failure to comply with such obligations or in case it acts outside or contrary to the lawful instructions of the controller. 75. Processing of personal data can involve multiple processors. For example, a controller may itself choose to directly engage multiple processors, by involving different processors at separate stages of the processing (multiple processors). A controller might also decide to engage one processor, who in turn - with the authorisation of the controller - engages one or more other processors (“sub processor(s)”). The processing activity entrusted to the processor may be limited to a very specific task or context or may be more general and extended. 76. Two basic conditions for qualifying as processor are: a) being a separate entity in relation to the controller and b) processing personal data on the controller’s behalf. --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted - After public consultation 77. A separate entity means that the controller decides to delegate all or part of the processing activities to an external organisation. Within a group of companies, one company can be a processor to another company acting as controller, as both companies are separate entities. On the other hand, a department within a company cannot be a processor to another department within the same entity. 78. If the controller decides to process data itself, using its own resources within its organisation, for example through its own staff, this is not a processor situation. Employees and other persons that are acting under the direct authority of the controller, such as temporarily employed staff, are not to be seen as processors since they will process personal data as a part of the controller’s entity. In accordance with Article 29, they are also bound by the controller’s instructions. 79. Processing personal data on the controller’s behalf firstly requires that the separate entity processes personal data for the benefit of the controller. In Article 4(2), processing is defined as a concept including a wide array of operations ranging from collection, storage and consultation to use, dissemination or otherwise making available and destruction.. The concept of “processing” is further described above under 2.1.5. 80. Secondly, the processing must be done on behalf of a controller but otherwise than under its direct authority or control. Acting “on behalf of” means serving someone else’s interest and recalls the legal concept of “delegation”. In the case of data