documents; national identification number; employment context; processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes; secrecy; churches and religious associations). Article 3(2) of the GDPR provides that “this Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subjects who are in the Union by a controller or processor not established in the Union, where the processing activities are related to: (a) the offering of goods or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject is required, to such data subjects in the Union; or (b) the monitoring of their behaviour as far as their behaviour takes place within the Union.” The application of the “targeting criterion” towards data subjects who are in the Union, as per Article 3(2), can be triggered by processing activities carried out by a controller or processor not established in the Union which relate to two distinct and alternative types of activities provided that these processing activities relate to data subjects that are in the Union.. In addition to being applicable only to processing by a controller or processor not established in the Union, the targeting criterion largely focuses on what the “processing activities” are “related to”, which is to be considered on a case-by- case basis. The EDPB stresses that a controller or processor may be subject to the GDPR in relation to some of its processing activities but not subject to the GDPR in relation to other processing activities. The determining element to the territorial application of the GDPR as per Article 3(2) lies in the consideration of the processing activities in question. In assessing the conditions for the application of the targeting criterion, the EDPB therefore recommends a twofold approach, in order to determine first that the processing relates to personal data of data subjects who are in the Union, and second whether processing relates to the offering of goods or services or to the monitoring of data subjects’ behaviour in the Union. a) Data subjects in the Union The wording of Article 3(2) refers to “personal data of data subjects who are in the Union”. The application of the targeting criterion is therefore not limited by the citizenship, residence or other type of legal status of the data subject whose personal data are being processed. Recital 14 confirms this interpretation and states that “[t]he protection afforded by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data”. This provision of the GDPR reflects EU primary law which also lays down a broad scope for the protection of personal data, not limited to EU citizens, with Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights providing that the right to the protection of personal data is not limited but is for “everyone”22. 22 Charter of Fundamental Right of the European Union, Article 8(1), « Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her”. --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted While the location of the data subject in the territory of the Union is a determining factor for the application of the targeting criterion as per Article 3(2), the EDPB considers that the nationality or legal status of a data subject who is in the Union cannot limit or restrict the territorial scope of the Regulation. The requirement that the data subject be located in the Union must be assessed at the moment when the relevant trigger activity takes place, i.e. at the moment of offering of goods or services or the moment when the behaviour is being monitored, regardless of the duration of the offer made or monitoring undertaken. The EDPB considers however that, in relation to processing activities related to the offer of services, the provision is aimed at activities that intentionally, rather than inadvertently or incidentally, target individuals in the EU. Consequently, if the processing relates to a service that is only offered to individuals outside the EU but the service is not withdrawn when such individuals enter the EU, the related processing will not be subject to the GDPR. In this case the processing is not related to the intentional targeting of individuals in the EU but relates to the targeting of individuals outside the EU which will continue whether they remain outside the EU or whether they visit the Union. Example 8: An Australian company offers a mobile news and video content service, based on users’ preferences and interest. Users can receive daily or weekly updates. The service is offered exclusively to users located in Australia, who must provide an Australian phone number when subscribing. An Australian subscriber of the service travels to Germany on holiday and continues using the service. Although the Australian subscriber will be using the service while in the EU, the service is not ‘targeting’ individuals in the Union, but targets only individuals in Australia, and so the processing of personal data by the Australian company does not fall within the scope of the GDPR. Example 9: A start-up established in the USA, without any business presence or establishment in the EU, provides a city-mapping application for tourists. The application processes personal data concerning the location of customers using the app (the data subjects) once they start using the application in the city they visit, in order to offer targeted advertisement for places to visits, restaurant, bars and hotels. The application is available for tourists while they visit New York, San Francisco, Toronto, Paris and Rome. The US start-up, via its city mapping application, is specifically targeting individuals in the Union (namely in Paris and Rome) through offering its services to them when they are in the Union. The processing of the EU-located data subjects’ personal data in connection with the offering of the service falls within the scope of the GDPR as per Article 3(2)a. Furthermore, by processing data subject’s location data in order to offer targeted advertisement on the basis of their location, the processing activities also relate to the monitoring of behaviour of individuals in the Union. The US start-up processing therefore also falls within the scope of the GDPR as per Article 3(2)b. The EDPB also wishes to underline that the fact of processing personal data of an individual in the Union alone is not sufficient to trigger the application of the GDPR to processing activities of a controller or processor not established in the Union. The element of "targeting" individuals in the EU, either by offering goods or services to them or by monitoring their behaviour (as further clarified below), must always be present in addition. --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted Example 10: A U.S. citizen is travelling through Europe during his holidays. While in Europe, he downloads and uses a news app that is offered by a U.S. company. The app is exclusively directed at the U.S. market, evident by the app terms of use and the indication of US Dollar as the sole currency available for payment. The collection of the U.S. tourist's personal data via the app by the U.S. company is not subject to the GDPR. Moreover, it should be noted that the processing of personal data of EU citizens or residents that takes place in a third country does not trigger the application of the GDPR, as long as the processing is not related to a specific offer directed at individuals in the EU or to a monitoring of their behaviour in the Union. Example 11: A bank in Taiwan has customers that are residing in Taiwan but hold German citizenship. The bank is active only in Taiwan; its activities are not directed at the EU market. The bank's processing of the personal data of its German customers is not subject to the GDPR. Example 12: The Canadian immigration authority processes personal data of EU citizens when entering the Canadian territory for the purpose of examining their visa application. This processing is not subject to the GDPR. b) Offering of goods or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject is required, to data subjects in the Union The first activity triggering the application of Article 3(2) is the “offering of goods or services”, a concept which has been further addressed by EU law and case law, which should be taken into account when applying the targeting criterion. The offering of services also includes the offering of information society services, defined in point (b) of Article 1(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/153523 as “any Information Society service, that is to say, any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services”. Article 3(2)(a) specifies that the targeting criterion concerning the offering of goods or services applies irrespective of whether a payment by the data subject is required. Whether the activity of a controller or processor not established in the Union is to be considered as an offer of a good or a service is not therefore