authority processes personal data of EU citizens when entering the Canadian territory for the purpose of examining their visa application. This processing is not subject to the GDPR. b) Offering of goods or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject is required, to data subjects in the Union The first activity triggering the application of Article 3(2) is the “offering of goods or services”, a concept which has been further addressed by EU law and case law, which should be taken into account when applying the targeting criterion. The offering of services also includes the offering of information society services, defined in point (b) of Article 1(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/153523 as “any Information Society service, that is to say, any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services”. Article 3(2)(a) specifies that the targeting criterion concerning the offering of goods or services applies irrespective of whether a payment by the data subject is required. Whether the activity of a controller or processor not established in the Union is to be considered as an offer of a good or a service is not therefore dependent whether payment is made in exchange for the goods or services provided24. Example 13: A US company, without any establishment in the EU, processes personal data of its employees that were on a temporary business trip to France, Belgium and the Netherlands for human resources purposes, in particular to proceed with the reimbursement of their accommodation expenses and the payment of their daily allowance, which vary depending on the country they are in. In this situation, while the processing activity is specifically connected to persons on the territory of the Union (i.e. employees who are temporarily in France, Belgium and the Netherlands) it does not relate to an offer of a service to those individuals, but rather is part of the processing necessary for the employer to fulfil its contractual obligation and human resources duties related to the individual’s 23 Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 September 2015 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical regulations and of rules on Information Society services. 24 See, in particular, CJEU, C-352/85, Bond van Adverteerders and Others vs. The Netherlands State, 26 April 1988, par. 16), and CJEU, C-109/92, Wirth [1993] Racc. I-6447, par. 15. --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted employment. The processing activity does not relate to an offer of service and is therefore not subject to the provision of the GDPR as per Article 3(2)a. Another key element to be assessed in determining whether the Article 3(2)(a) targeting criterion can be met is whether the offer of goods or services is directed at a person in the Union, or in other words, whether the conduct on the part of the controller, which determines the means and purposes of processing, demonstrates its intention to offer goods or a services to a data subject located in the Union. Recital 23 of the GDPR indeed clarifies that “in order to determine whether such a controller or processor is offering goods or services to data subjects who are in the Union, it should be ascertained whether it is apparent that the controller or processor envisages offering services to data subjects in one or more Member States in the Union.” The recital further specifies that “whereas the mere accessibility of the controller's, processor's or an intermediary's website in the Union, of an email address or of other contact details, or the use of a language generally used in the third country where the controller is established, is insufficient to ascertain such intention, factors such as the use of a language or a currency generally used in one or more Member States with the possibility of ordering goods and services in that other language, or the mentioning of customers or users who are in the Union, may make it apparent that the controller envisages offering goods or services to data subjects in the Union.” The elements listed in Recital 23 echo and are in line with the CJEU case law based on Council Regulation 44/200125 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, and in particular its Article 15(1)(c). In Pammer v Reederei Karl Schlüter GmbH & Co and Hotel Alpenhof v Heller (Joined cases C-585/08 and C-144/09), the Court was asked to clarify what it means to “direct activity” within the meaning of Article 15(1)(c) of Regulation 44/2001 (Brussels I). The CJEU held that, in order to determine whether a trader can be considered to be “directing” its activity to the Member State of the consumer’s domicile, within the meaning of Article 15(1)(c) of Brussels I, the trader must have manifested its intention to establish commercial relations with such consumers. In this context, the CJEU considered evidence able to demonstrate that the trader was envisaging doing business with consumers domiciled in a Member State. While the notion of “directing an activity” differs from the “offering of goods or services”, the EDPB deems this case law in in Pammer v Reederei Karl Schlüter GmbH & Co and Hotel Alpenhof v Heller (Joined cases C-585/08 and C-144/09)26 might be of assistance when considering whether goods or services are offered to a data subject in the Union. When taking into account the specific facts of the case, the following factors could therefore inter alia be taken into consideration, possibly in combination with one another: - The EU or at least one Member State is designated by name with reference to the good or service offered; - The data controller or processor pays a search engine operator for an internet referencing service in order to facilitate access to its site by consumers in the Union; or the controller or processor has launched marketing and advertisement campaigns directed at an EU country audience - The international nature of the activity at issue, such as certain tourist activities; 25 Council Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters. 26 It is all the more relevant that, under Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I), in absence of choice of law, this criterion of “directing activity” to the country of the consumer’s habitual residence is taken into account to designate the law of the consumer’s habitual residence as the law applicable to the contract. --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted - The mention of dedicated addresses or phone numbers to be reached from an EU country; - The use of a top-level domain name other than that of the third country in which the controller or processor is established, for example “.de”, or the use of neutral top-level domain names such as “.eu”; - The description of travel instructions from one or more other EU Member States to the place where the service is provided; - The mention of an international clientele composed of customers domiciled in various EU Member States, in particular by presentation of accounts written by such customers; - The use of a language or a currency other than that generally used in the trader’s country, especially a language or currency of one or more EU Member states; - The data controller offers the delivery of goods in EU Member States. As already mentioned, several of the elements listed above, if taken alone may not amount to a clear indication of the intention of a data controller to offer goods or services to data subjects in the Union, however, they should each be taken into account in any in concreto analysis in order to determine whether the combination of factors relating to the data controller’s commercial activities can together be considered as an offer of goods or services directed at data subjects in the Union. It is however important to recall that Recital 23 confirms that the mere accessibility of the controller's, processor's or an intermediary's website in the Union, the mention on the website of its e-mail or geographical address, or of its telephone number without an international code, does not, of itself, provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate the controller or processor’s intention to offer goods or a services to a data subject located in the Union. In this context, the EDPB recalls that when goods or services are inadvertently or incidentally provided to a person on the territory of the Union, the related processing of personal data would not fall within the territorial scope of the GDPR. Example 14: A website, based and managed in Turkey, offers services for the creation, editing, printing and shipping of personalised family photo albums. The website is available in English, French, Dutch and German and payments can be made in Euros. The website indicates that photo albums