the activities of the processor in the Union”. The processing is carried out in the context of the controller’s own activities; the processor is merely providing a processing service18 which is not “inextricably linked” to the activities of the controller. As stated above, in the case of a data processor established in the Union and carrying out processing on behalf of a data controller established outside the Union and not subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(2), the EDPB considers that the processing activities of the data controller would not be deemed as falling under the territorial scope of the GDPR merely because it is processed on its behalf by a processor established in the Union. However, even though the data controller is not established in the Union and is not subject to the provisions of the GDPR as per Article 3(2), the data processor, as it is established in the Union, will be subject to the relevant provisions of the GDPR as per Article 3(1). Example 7: A Mexican retail company enters into a contract with a processor established in Spain for the processing of personal data relating to the Mexican company’s clients. The Mexican company offers and directs its services exclusively to the Mexican market and its processing concerns exclusively data subjects located outside the Union. In this case, the Mexican retail company does not target persons on the territory of the Union through the offering of goods or services, nor it does monitor the behaviour of person on the territory of the Union. The processing by the data controller, established outside the Union, is therefore not subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(2). The provisions of the GDPR do not apply to the data controller by virtue of Art 3(1) as it is not processing personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment in the Union. The data processor is established in Spain and therefore its processing will fall within the scope of the GDPR by virtue of Art 3(1). The processor will be required to comply with the processor obligations imposed by the regulation for any processing carried out in the context of its activities. When it comes to a data processor established in the Union carrying out processing on behalf of a data controller with no establishment in the Union for the purposes of the processing activity and which does not fall under the territorial scope of the GDPR as per Article 3(2), the processor will be subject to the following relevant GDPR provisions directly applicable to data processors: - The obligations imposed on processors under Article 28 (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6), on the duty to enter into a data processing agreement, with the exception of those relating to the assistance to the data controller in complying with its (the controller’s) own obligations under the GDPR. - The processor and any person acting under the authority of the controller or of the processor, who has access to personal data, shall not process those data except on instructions from the controller, unless required to do so by Union or Member State law, as per Article 29 and Article 32(4). - Where applicable, the processor shall maintain a record of all categories of processing carried out on behalf of a controller, as per Article 30(2). 18 The offering of a processing service in this context cannot be considered either as an offer of a service to data subjects in the Union. --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted - Where applicable, the processor shall, upon request, cooperate with the supervisory authority in the performance of its tasks, as per Article 31. - The processor shall implement technical and organisational measures to ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk, as per Article 32. - The processor shall notify the controller without undue delay after becoming aware of a personal data breach, as per Article 33. - Where applicable, the processor shall designate a data protection officer as per Articles 37 and 38. - The provisions on transfers of personal data to third countries or international organisations, as per Chapter V. In addition, since such processing would be carried out in the context of the activities of an establishment of a processor in the Union, the EDPB recalls that the processor will have to ensure its processing remains lawful with regards to other obligations under EU or national law. Article 28(3) also specifies that “the processor shall immediately inform the controller if, in its opinion, an instruction infringes this Regulation or other Union or Member State data protection provisions.” In line with the positions taken previously by the Article 29 Working Party, the EDPB takes the view that the Union territory cannot be used as a “data haven”, for instance when a processing activity entails inadmissible ethical issues19, and that certain legal obligations beyond the application of EU data protection law, in particular European and national rules with regard to public order, will in any case have to be respected by any data processor established in the Union, regardless of the location of the data controller. This consideration also takes into account the fact that by implementing EU law, provisions resulting from the GDPR and related national laws, are subject to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union20. However, this does not impose additional obligations on controllers outside the Union in respect of processing not falling under the territorial scope of the GDPR. 2 APPLICATION OF THE TARGETING CRITERION – ART 3(2) The absence of an establishment in the Union does not necessarily mean that processing activities by a data controller or processor established in a third country will be excluded from the scope of the GDPR, since Article 3(2) sets out the circumstances in which the GDPR applies to a controller or processor not established in the Union, depending on their processing activities. In this context, the EDPB confirms that in the absence of an establishment in the Union, a controller or processor cannot benefit from the one-stop shop mechanism provided for in Article 56 of the GDPR. Indeed, the GDPR’s cooperation and consistency mechanism only applies to controllers and processors with an establishment, or establishments, within the European Union21. While the present guidelines aim to clarify the territorial scope of the GDPR, the EDPB also wish to stress that controllers and processors will also need to take into account other applicable texts, such as for instance EU or Member States’ sectorial legislation and national laws. Several provisions of the GDPR indeed allow Member States to introduce additional conditions and to define a specific data protection framework at national level in certain areas or in relation to specific processing situations. 19 G29 WP169 - Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of "controller" and "processor", adopted on 16th February 2010 and under revision by the EDPB. 20 Charter of Fundamental Right of the European Union, 2012/C 326/02. 21 G29 WP244 rev.1, 13th December 2016, Guidelines for identifying a controller or processor’s lead supervisory authority - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted Controllers and processors must therefore ensure that they are aware of, and comply with, these additional conditions and frameworks which may vary from one Member State to the other. Such variations in the data protection provisions applicable in each Member State are particularly notable in relation to the provisions of Article 8 ( providing that the age at which children may give valid consent in relation to the processing of their data by information society services may vary between 13 and 16), of Article 9 (in relation to the processing of special categories of data), Article 23 (restrictions) or concerning the provisions contained in Chapter IX of the GDPR (freedom of expression and information; public access to official documents; national identification number; employment context; processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes; secrecy; churches and religious associations). Article 3(2) of the GDPR provides that “this Regulation applies to the processing of personal data of data subjects who are in the Union by a controller or processor not established in the Union, where the processing activities are related to: (a) the offering of goods or services, irrespective of whether a payment of the data subject is required, to such data subjects in the Union; or (b) the monitoring of their behaviour as far as their behaviour takes place within the Union.” The application of the “targeting criterion” towards data subjects who are in the Union, as per Article 3(2), can be triggered by processing activities carried out by a controller or processor not established in the Union which relate to two distinct and alternative types of activities provided that these processing activities relate to data subjects that are in the Union.. In addition to being applicable only to processing by a controller or processor not established in the Union, the targeting criterion largely focuses on what the “processing activities” are “related