diplomatic mission or consular post.” The EDPB therefore considers that the GDPR applies to personal data processing carried out by EU Member States’ embassies and consulates located outside the EU as such processing falls within the scope of the GDPR by virtue of Article 3(3).. A Member State’s diplomatic or consular post, as a data controller or processor, would then be subject to all relevant provisions of the GDPR, including when it comes to the rights of the data subject, the general obligations related to controller and processor and the transfers of personal data to third countries or international organisations. Example 22: The Dutch consulate in Kingston, Jamaica, opens an online application process for the recruitment of local staff in order to support its administration. While the Dutch consulate in Kingston, Jamaica, is not established in the Union, the fact that it is a consular post of an EU country where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law renders the GDPR applicable to its processing of personal data, as per Article 3(3). --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted Example 23: A German cruise ship travelling in international waters is processing data of the guests on board for the purpose of tailoring the in-cruise entertainment offer. While the ship is located outside the Union, in international waters, the fact that it is German- registered cruise ship means that by virtue of public international law the GDPR shall be applicable to its processing of personal data, as per Article 3(3). Though not related to the application of Article 3(3), a different situation is the one where, by virtue of international law, certain entities, bodies or organisations established in the Union benefit from privileges and immunities such as those laid down in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 196127, the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963 or headquarter agreements concluded between international organisations and their host countries in the Union. In this regard, the EDPB recalls that the application of the GDPR is without prejudice to the provisions of international law, such as the ones governing the privileges and immunities of non-EU diplomatic missions and consular posts, as well as international organisations. At the same time, it is important to recall that any controller or processor that falls within the scope of the GDPR for a given processing activity and that exchanges personal data with such entities, bodies and organisations have to comply with the GDPR, including where applicable its rules on transfers to third countries or international organisations. 4 REPRESENTATIVE OF CONTROLLERS OR PROCESSORS NOT ESTABLISHED IN THE UNION Data controllers or processors subject to the GDPR as per its Article 3(2) are under the obligation to designate a representative in the Union. A controller or processor not established in the Union but subject to the GDPR failing to designate a representative in the Union would therefore be in breach of the Regulation. This provision is not entirely new since Directive 95/46/EC already provided for a similar obligation. Under the Directive, this provision concerned controllers not established on Community territory that, for purposes of processing personal data, made use of equipment, automated or otherwise, situated on the territory of a Member State. The GDPR imposes an obligation to designate a representative in the Union to any controller or processor falling under the scope of Article 3(2), unless they meet the exemption criteria as per Article 27(2). In order to facilitate the application of this specific provision, the EDPB deems it necessary to provide further guidance on the designation process, establishment obligations and responsibilities of the representative in the Union as per Article 27. It is worth noting that a controller or processor not established in the Union who has designated in writing a representative in the Union, in accordance with article 27 of the GDPR, does not fall within the scope of article 3(1), meaning that the presence of the representative within the Union does not constitute an “establishment” of a controller or processor by virtue of article 3(1). a) Designation of a representative Recital 80 clarifies that “[t]he representative should be explicitly designated by a written mandate of the controller or of the processor to act on its behalf with regard to its obligations under this Regulation. The designation of such a representative does not affect the responsibility or liability of the controller or of the processor under this Regulation. Such a representative should perform its tasks according to 27 http://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/conventions/9_1_1961.pdf --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted the mandate received from the controller or processor, including cooperating with the competent supervisory authorities with regard to any action taken to ensure compliance with this Regulation.” The written mandate referred to in Recital 80 shall therefore govern the relations and obligations between the representative in the Union and the data controller or processor established outside the Union, while not affecting the responsibility or liability of the controller or processor. The representative in the Union may be a natural or a legal person established in the Union able to represent a data controller or processor established outside the Union with regard to their respective obligations under the GDPR. In practice, the function of representative in the Union can be exercised based on a service contract concluded with an individual or an organisation, and can therefore be assumed by a wide range of commercial and non-commercial entities, such as law firms, consultancies, private companies, etc... provided that such entities are established in the Union. One representative can also act on behalf of several non-EU controllers and processors. When the function of representative is assumed by a company or any other type of organisation, it is recommended that a single individual be assigned as a lead contact and person “in charge” for each controller or processor represented. It would generally also be useful to specify these points in the service contract. In line with the GDPR, the EDPB confirms that, when several processing activities of a controller or processor fall within the scope of Article 3(2) GDPR (and none of the exceptions of Article 27(2) GDPR apply), that controller or processor is not expected to designate several representatives for each separate processing activity falling within the scope of article 3(2).The EDPB does not consider the function of representative in the Union as compatible with the role of an external data protection officer (“DPO”) which would be established in the Union. Article 38(3) establishes some basic guarantees to help ensure that DPOs are able to perform their tasks with a sufficient degree of autonomy within their organisation. In particular, controllers or processors are required to ensure that the DPO “does not receive any instructions regarding the exercise of [his or her] tasks”. Recital 97 adds that DPOs, “whether or not they are an employee of the controller, should be in a position to perform their duties and tasks in an independent manner”28. Such requirement for a sufficient degree of autonomy and independence of a data protection officer does not appear to be compatible with the function of representative in the Union. The representative is indeed subject to a mandate by a controller or processor and will be acting on its behalf and therefore under its direct instruction29. The representative is mandated by the controller or processor it represents, and therefore acting on its behalf in exercising its task, and such a role cannot be compatible with the carrying out of duties and tasks of the data protection officer in an independent manner. Furthermore, and to complement its interpretation, the EDPB recalls the position already taken by the WP29 stressing that “a conflict of interests may also arise for example if an external DPO is asked to represent the controller or processor before the Courts in cases involving data protection issues”30. Similarly, given the possible conflict of obligation and interests in cases of enforcement proceedings, the EDPB does not consider the function of a data controller representative in the Union as compatible 28 WP29 Guidelines on Data Protection Officers (‘DPOs’), WP 243 rev.01 - endorsed by the EDPB. 29 An external DPO also acting as representative in the Union could not for example be in a situation where he is instructed, as a representative, to communicate to a data subject a decision or measure taken by the controller or processor which he or she, as a DPO, had deemed uncompliant with the provisions of the GDPR and advised against. 30 WP29 Guidelines on Data Protection Officers (‘DPOs’), WP 243 rev.01 - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted with the role of data processor for that same data controller, in particular when it comes to compliance with their respective responsibilities and compliance. While the GDPR does not impose any obligation on the data controller or the representative itself to notify the designation of the latter to a supervisory authority, the EDPB recalls that, in accordance with Articles 13(1)a and 14(1)a, as part of their information obligations, controllers shall provide data subjects information as