case law and previous WP29 opinion3, the determination of whether an entity is a controller or processor for the purposes of EU data protection law is a key element in the assessment of the application of the GDPR to the personal data processing in question. While the notion of “main establishment” is defined in Article 4(16), the GDPR does not provide a definition of “establishment” for the purpose of Article 34. However, Recital 225 clarifies that an “[e]stablishment implies the effective and real exercise of activities through stable arrangements. The legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a subsidiary with a legal personality, is not the determining factor in that respect.” This wording is identical to that found in Recital 19 of Directive 95/46/EC, to which reference has been made in several CJEU rulings broadening the interpretation of the term “establishment”, departing from a formalistic approach whereby undertakings are established solely in the place where they are registered6. Indeed, the CJEU ruled that the notion of establishment extends to any real and effective activity — even a minimal one — exercised through stable arrangements7. In order to determine whether an entity based outside the Union has an establishment in a Member State, both the degree of stability of the arrangements and the effective exercise of activities in that Member State must be considered in the light of the specific nature of the economic activities and the provision of services concerned. This is particularly true for undertakings offering services exclusively over the Internet8. The threshold for “stable arrangement9” can actually be quite low when the centre of activities of a controller concerns the provision of services online. As a result, in some circumstances, the presence of one single employee or agent of a non-EU entity in the Union may be sufficient to constitute a stable arrangement (amounting to an ‘establishment’ for the purposes of Art 3(1)) if that employee or agent acts with a sufficient degree of stability. Conversely, when an employee is based in the EU but the processing is not being carried out in the context of the activities of the EU-based employee in the Union (i.e. the processing relates to activities of the controller outside the EU), the mere presence of an employee in the EU will not result in that processing falling within the scope of the GDPR. In other words, the mere presence of an employee in the EU is not as such sufficient to trigger the application of the GDPR, since for the processing in question to fall within the scope of the GDPR, it must also be carried out in the context of the activities of the EU-based employee. The fact that the non-EU entity responsible for the data processing does not have a branch or subsidiary in a Member State does not preclude it from having an establishment there within the 3 G 29 WP169 - Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of "controller" and "processor", adopted on 16th February 2010 and under revision by the EDPB. 4 The definition of “main establishment” is mainly relevant for the purpose of determining the competence of the supervisory authorities concerned according to Article 56 GDPR. See the WP29 Guidelines for identifying a controller or processor’s lead supervisory authority (16/EN WP 244 rev.01) - endorsed by the EDPB. 5 Recital 22 of the GDPR: “Any processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union should be carried out in accordance with this Regulation, regardless of whether the processing itself takes place within the Union. Establishment implies the effective and real exercise of activity through stable arrangements. The legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a subsidiary with a legal personality, is not the determining factor in that respect.” 6 See in particular Google Spain SL, Google Inc. v AEPD, Mario Costeja González (C-131/12), Weltimmo v NAIH (C- 230/14), Verein für Konsumenteninformation v Amazon EU (C-191/15) and Wirtschaftsakademie Schleswig- Holstein (C-210/16). 7 Weltimmo, paragraph 31. 8 Weltimmo, paragraph 29. 9 Weltimmo, paragraph 31. --- PAGE 7 --- Adopted meaning of EU data protection law. Although the notion of establishment is broad, it is not without limits. It is not possible to conclude that the non-EU entity has an establishment in the Union merely because the undertaking’s website is accessible in the Union10. Example 1: A car manufacturing company with headquarters in the US has a fully-owned branch office located in Brussels overseeing all its operations in Europe, including marketing and advertisement. The Belgian branch can be considered to be a stable arrangement, which exercises real and effective activities in light of the nature of the economic activity carried out by the car manufacturing company. As such, the Belgian branch could therefore be considered as an establishment in the Union, within the meaning of the GDPR. Once it is concluded that a controller or processor is established in the EU, an in concreto analysis should then follow to determine whether the processing in question is carried out in the context of the activities of this establishment, in order to determine whether Article 3(1) applies. If a controller or processor established outside the Union exercises “a real and effective activity - even a minimal one” - through “stable arrangements”, regardless of its legal form (e.g. subsidiary, branch, office...), in the territory of a Member State, this controller or processor can be considered to have an establishment in that Member State11. It is therefore important to consider whether the processing of personal data takes place “in the context of the activities of” such an establishment as highlighted in Recital 22. b) Processing of personal data carried out “in the context of the activities of” an establishment Article 3(1) confirms that it is not necessary that the processing in question is carried out “by” the relevant EU establishment itself; the controller or processor will be subject to obligations under the GDPR whenever the processing is carried out ”in the context of the activities” of its relevant establishment in the Union. The EDPB recommends that determining whether processing is being carried out in the context of an establishment of the controller or processor in the Union for the purposes of Article 3(1) should be carried out on a case-by-case basis and based on an analysis in concreto. Each scenario must be assessed on its own merits, taking into account the specific facts of the case. The EDPB considers that, for the purpose of Article 3(1), the meaning of “processing in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor” is to be understood in light of the relevant case law. On the one hand, with a view to fulfilling the objective of ensuring effective and complete protection, the meaning of “in the context of the activities of an establishment” cannot be interpreted restrictively12. On the other hand, the existence of an establishment within the meaning of the GDPR should not be interpreted too broadly to conclude that the existence of any presence in the EU with even the remotest links to the data processing activities of a non-EU entity will be sufficient to bring this processing within the scope of EU data protection law. Some commercial activity carried out by a non-EU entity within a Member State may indeed be so far removed from the processing of 10 CJEU, Verein für Konsumenteninformation v. Amazon EU Sarl, Case C‐191/15, 28 July 2016, paragraph 76 (hereafter “Verein für Konsumenteninformation”). 11 See in particular para 29 of the Weltimmo judgment, which emphasizes a flexible definition of the concept of 'establishment' and clarifies that 'the degree of stability of the arrangements and the effective exercise of activities in that other Member State must be interpreted in the light of the specific nature of the economic activities and the provision of services concerned.' 12 Weltimmo, paragraph 25 and Google Spain, paragraph 53. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted personal data by this entity that the existence of the commercial activity in the EU would not be sufficient to bring the data processing by the non-EU entity within the scope of EU data protection law13. Consideration of the following two factors may help to determine whether the processing is being carried out by a controller or processor in the context of its establishment in the Union i) Relationship between a data controller or processor outside the Union and its local establishment in the Union The data processing activities of a data controller or processor established outside the EU may be inextricably linked to the activities of a local establishment in a Member State, and thereby may trigger the applicability of EU law, even if that local establishment is not actually taking any role in the data processing itself14. If a case by case analysis on the facts shows that there is an inextricable link between the processing of personal data carried out by a non-EU controller