- CCTV - Market surveys and other behavioural studies based on individual profiles - Monitoring or regular reporting on an individual’s health status Example 17: A retail consultancy company established in the US provides advice on retail layout to a shopping centre in France, based on an analysis of customers’ movements throughout the centre collected through Wi-Fi tracking. The analysis of a customers’ movements within the centre through Wi-Fi tracking will amount to the monitoring of individuals’ behaviour. In this case, the data subjects’ behaviour takes place in the Union since the shopping centre is located in France. The consultancy company, as a data controller, is therefore subject to the GDPR in respect of the processing of this data for this purpose as per its Article 3(2)(b). In accordance with Article 27, the data controller will have to designate a representative in the Union. Example 18: An app developer established in Canada with no establishment in the Union monitors the behaviour of data subject in the Union and is therefore subject to the GDPR, as per Article 3(2)b. The developer uses a processor established in the US for the app optimisation and maintenance purposes. In relation to this processing, the Canadian controller has the duty to only use appropriate processors and to ensure that its obligations under the GDPR are reflected in the contract or legal act governing the relation with its processor in the US, pursuant to Article 28. d) Processor not established in the Union Processing activities which are “related” to the targeting activity which triggered the application of Article 3(2) fall within the territorial scope of the GDPR. The EDPB considers that there needs to be a --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted connection between the processing activity and the offering of good or service, but both processing by a controller and a processor are relevant and to be taken into account. When it comes to a data processor not established in the Union, in order to determine whether its processing may be subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(2), it is necessary to look at whether the processing activities by the processor “are related” to the targeting activities of the controller. The EDPB considers that, where processing activities by a controller relates to the offering of goods or services or to the monitoring of individuals’ behaviour in the Union (‘targeting’), any processor instructed to carry out that processing activity on behalf of the controller will fall within the scope of the GDPR by virtue of Art 3(2) in respect of that processing. The ‘Targeting’ character of a processing activity is linked to its purposes and means; a decision to target individuals in the Union can only be made by an entity acting as a controller. Such interpretation does not rule out the possibility that the processor may actively take part in processing activities related to carrying out the targeting criteria (i.e. the processor offers goods or services or carries out monitoring actions on behalf of, and on instruction from, the controller). The EDPB therefore considers that the focus should be on the connection between the processing activities carried out by the processor and the targeting activity undertaken by a data controller. Example 19: A Brazilian company sells food ingredients and local recipes online, making this offer of good available to persons in the Union, by advertising these products and offering the delivery in the France, Spain and Portugal. In this context, the company instructs a data processor also established in Brazil to develop special offers to customers in France, Spain and Portugal on the basis of their previous orders and to carry out the related data processing. Processing activities by the processor, under the instruction of the data controller, are related to the offer of good to data subject in the Union. Furthermore, by developing these customized offers, the data processor directly monitors data subjects in the EU. Processing by the processor are therefore subject to the GDPR, as per Article 3(2). Example 20: A US company has developed a health and lifestyle app, allowing users to record with the US company their personal indicators (sleep time, weight, blood pressure, heartbeat, etc...). The app then provide users with daily advice on food and sport recommendations. The processing is carried out by the US data controller. The app is made available to, and is used by, individuals in the Union. For the purpose of data storage, the US company uses a processor established in the US (cloud service provider) To the extent that the US company is monitoring the behaviour of individuals in the EU, in operating the health and lifestyle app it will be ‘targeting’ individuals in the EU and its processing of the personal data of individuals in the EU will fall within the scope of the GDPR under Art 3(2). In carrying out the processing on instructions from, and on behalf of, the US company the cloud provider/processor is carrying out a processing activity ‘relating to’ the targeting of individuals in the EU by its controller. This processing activity by the processor on behalf of its controller falls within the scope of the GDPR under Art 3(2). Example 21: A Turkish company offers cultural package travels in the Middle East with tour guides speaking English, French and Spanish. The package travels are notably advertised and offered through a website available in the three languages, allowing for online booking and payment in Euros and GBP. For marketing and commercial prospection purposes, the company instructs a data processor, a call --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted center, established in Tunisia to contact former customers in Ireland, France, Belgium and Spain in order to get feedback on their previous travels and inform them about new offers and destinations. The controller is ‘targeting’ by offering its services to individuals in the EU and its processing will fall within the scope of Art 3(2). The processing activities of the Tunisian processor, which promotes the controllers’ services towards individuals in the EU, is also related to the offer of services by the controller and therefore falls within the scope of Art 3(2). Furthermore, in this specific case, the Tunisian processor actively takes part in processing activities related to carrying out the targeting criteria, by offering services on behalf of, and on instruction from, the Turkish controller. e) Interaction with other GDPR provisions and other legislations The EDPB will also further assess the interplay between the application of the territorial scope of the GDPR as per Article 3 and the provisions on international data transfers as per Chapter V. Additional guidance may be issued in this regard, should this be necessary. Controllers or processors not established in the EU will be required to comply with their own third country national laws in relation to the processing of personal data. However, where such processing relates to the targeting of individuals in the Union as per Article 3(2) the controller will, in addition to being subject to its country’s national law, be required to comply with the GDPR. This would be the case regardless of whether the processing is carried out in compliance with a legal obligation in the third country or simply as a matter of choice by the controller. 3 PROCESSING IN A PLACE WHERE MEMBER STATE LAW APPLIES BY VIRTUE OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW Article 3(3) provides that “[t]his Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by a controller not established in the Union, but in a place where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law”. This provision is expanded upon in Recital 25 which states that “[w]here Member State law applies by virtue of public international law, this Regulation should also apply to a controller not established in the Union, such as in a Member State's diplomatic mission or consular post.” The EDPB therefore considers that the GDPR applies to personal data processing carried out by EU Member States’ embassies and consulates located outside the EU as such processing falls within the scope of the GDPR by virtue of Article 3(3).. A Member State’s diplomatic or consular post, as a data controller or processor, would then be subject to all relevant provisions of the GDPR, including when it comes to the rights of the data subject, the general obligations related to controller and processor and the transfers of personal data to third countries or international organisations. Example 22: The Dutch consulate in Kingston, Jamaica, opens an online application process for the recruitment of local staff in order to support its administration. While the Dutch consulate in Kingston, Jamaica, is not established in the Union, the fact that it is a consular post of an EU country where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law renders the GDPR applicable to its processing of personal data, as per Article 3(3). --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted Example 23: A German cruise ship travelling in international waters is processing data of the guests on board for the