(is it established inside or outside the Union?); - any business presence of a non-EU controller or processor (does it have an establishment in the Union?) However, geographical location is not important for the purposes of Article 3(1) with regard to the place in which processing is carried out, or with regard to the location of the data subjects in question. The text of Article 3(1) does not restrict the application of the GDPR to the processing of personal data of individuals who are in the Union. The EDPB therefore considers that any personal data processing in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or processor in the Union would fall under the scope of the GDPR, regardless of the location or the nationality of the data subject whose personal data are being processed. This approach is supported by Recital 14 of the GDPR which states that “[t]he protection afforded by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data.” d) Application of the establishment criterion to controller and processor As far as processing activities falling under the scope of Article 3(1) are concerned, the EDPB considers that such provisions apply to controllers and processors whose processing activities are carried out in the context of the activities of their respective establishment in the EU. While acknowledging that the requirements for establishing the relationship between a controller and a processor17 does not vary depending on the geographical location of the establishment of a controller or processor, the EDPB takes the view that when it comes to the identification of the different obligations triggered by the applicability of the GDPR as per Article 3(1), the processing by each entity must be considered separately. The GDPR envisages different and dedicated provisions or obligations applying to data controllers and processors, and as such, should a data controller or processor be subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(1), the related obligations would apply to them respectively and separately. In this context, the EDPB notably deems that a processor in the EU should not be considered to be an establishment of a data controller within the meaning of Article 3(1) merely by virtue of its status as processor on behalf of a controller. The existence of a relationship between a controller and a processor does not necessarily trigger the application of the GDPR to both, should one of these two entities not be established in the Union. An organisation processing personal data on behalf of, and on instructions from, another organisation (the client company) will be acting as processor for the client company (the controller). Where a processor is established in the Union, it will be required to comply with the obligations imposed on 17 In accordance with Article 28, the EDPB recalls that processing activities by a processor on behalf of a controller shall be governed by a contract or other legal act under Union or Member State law, that is binding on the processor with regard to the controller, and that controllers shall only use processors providing sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate measures in such manner that processing will meet the requirement of the GDPR and ensure the protection of data subjects’ rights. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted processors by the GDPR (the ‘GDPR processor obligations’). If the controller instructing the processor is also located in the Union, that controller will be required to comply with the obligations imposed on controllers by the GDPR (the ‘GDPR controller obligations’). Processing activity which, when carried out by a controller, falls within the scope of the GDPR by virtue of Art 3(1) will not fall outside the scope of the Regulation simply because the controller instructs a processor not established in the Union to carry out that processing on its behalf. i) Processing by a controller established in the EU instructing a processor not established in the Union Where a controller subject to GDPR chooses to use a processor located outside the Union for a given processing activity, it will still be necessary for the controller to ensure by contract or other legal act that the processor processes the data in accordance with the GDPR. Article 28(3) provides that the processing by a processor shall be governed by a contract or other legal act. The controller will therefore need to ensure that it puts in place a contract with the processor addressing all the requirements set out in Article 28(3). In addition, it is likely that, in order to ensure that it has complied with its obligations under Article 28(1) – to use only a processor providing sufficient guarantees to implement measures in such a manner that processing will meet the requirements of the Regulation and protect the rights of data subjects – the controller may need to consider imposing, by contract, the obligations placed by the GDPR on processors subject to it. That is to say, the controller would have to ensure that the processor not subject to the GDPR complies with the obligations, governed by a contract or other legal act under Union or Member State law, referred to Article 28(3). The processor located outside the Union will therefore become indirectly subject to some obligations imposed by controllers subject to the GDPR by virtue of contractual arrangements under Article 28. Moreover, provisions of Chapter V of the GDPR may apply. Example 6: A Finnish research institute conducts research regarding the Sami people. The institute launches a project that only concerns Sami people in Russia. For this project the institute uses a processor based in Canada. The The Finnish controller has a duty to only use processors that provide sufficient guarantees to implement appropriate measures in such manner that processing will meet the requirement of the GDPR and ensure the protection of data subjects’ rights. The Finnish controller needs to enter into a data processing agreement with the Canadian processor, and the processor’s duties will be stipulated in that legal act. ii) Processing in the context of the activities of an establishment of a processor in the Union Whilst case law provides us with a clear understanding of the effect of processing being carried out in the context of the activities of an EU establishment of the controller, the effect of processing being carried out in the context of the activities of an EU establishment of a processor is less clear. The EDPB emphasises that it is important to consider the establishment of the controller and processor separately when determining whether each party is of itself ‘established in the Union’. The first question is whether the controller itself has an establishment in the Union, and is processing in the context of the activities of that establishment. Assuming the controller is not considered to be processing in the context of its own establishment in the Union, that controller will not be subject to GDPR controller obligations by virtue of Article 3(1) (although it may still be caught by Article 3(2)). Unless other factors are at play, the processor’s EU establishment will not be considered to be an establishment in respect of the controller. --- PAGE 12 --- Adopted The separate question then arises of whether the processor is processing in the context of its establishment in the Union. If so, the processor will be subject to GDPR processor obligations under Article 3(1). However, this does not cause the non-EU controller to become subject to the GDPR controller obligations. That is to say, a “non-EU” controller (as described above) will not become subject to the GDPR simply because it chooses to use a processor in the Union. By instructing a processor in the Union, the controller not subject to GDPR is not carrying out processing “in the context of the activities of the processor in the Union”. The processing is carried out in the context of the controller’s own activities; the processor is merely providing a processing service18 which is not “inextricably linked” to the activities of the controller. As stated above, in the case of a data processor established in the Union and carrying out processing on behalf of a data controller established outside the Union and not subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(2), the EDPB considers that the processing activities of the data controller would not be deemed as falling under the territorial scope of the GDPR merely because it is processed on its behalf by a processor established in the Union. However, even though the data controller is not established in the Union and is not subject to the provisions of the GDPR as per Article 3(2), the data processor, as it is established in the Union, will be subject to the relevant provisions of the GDPR as per Article 3(1). Example 7: A Mexican retail company enters into a contract with a processor established in Spain for the processing of personal data relating to the Mexican company’s clients. The Mexican company offers and