conflict of obligation and interests in cases of enforcement proceedings, the EDPB does not consider the function of a data controller representative in the Union as compatible 28 WP29 Guidelines on Data Protection Officers (‘DPOs’), WP 243 rev.01 - endorsed by the EDPB. 29 An external DPO also acting as representative in the Union could not for example be in a situation where he is instructed, as a representative, to communicate to a data subject a decision or measure taken by the controller or processor which he or she, as a DPO, had deemed uncompliant with the provisions of the GDPR and advised against. 30 WP29 Guidelines on Data Protection Officers (‘DPOs’), WP 243 rev.01 - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted with the role of data processor for that same data controller, in particular when it comes to compliance with their respective responsibilities and compliance. While the GDPR does not impose any obligation on the data controller or the representative itself to notify the designation of the latter to a supervisory authority, the EDPB recalls that, in accordance with Articles 13(1)a and 14(1)a, as part of their information obligations, controllers shall provide data subjects information as to the identity of their representative in the Union. This information shall for example be included in the [privacy notice and] upfront information provided to data subjects at the moment of data collection. A controller not established in the Union but falling under Article 3(2) and failing to inform data subjects who are in the Union of the identity of its representative would be in breach of its transparency obligations as per the GDPR. Such information should furthermore be easily accessible to supervisory authorities in order to facilitate the establishment of a contact for cooperation needs. Example 24: The website referred to in example 12, based and managed in Turkey, offers services for the creation, edition, printing and shipping of personalised family photo albums. The website is available in English, French, Dutch and German and payments can be made in Euros or Sterling. The website indicates that photo albums can only be delivered by post mail in the France, Benelux countries and Germany. This website being subject to the GDPR, as per its Article 3(2)(a), the data controller must designate a representative in the Union. The representative must be established in one of the Member States where the service offered is available, in this case either in France, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg or Germany. The name and contact details of the data controller and its representative in the Union must be part of the information made available online to data subjects once they start using the service by creating their photo album. It must also appear in the website general privacy notice. b) Exemptions from the designation obligation31 While the application of Article 3(2) triggers the obligation to designate a representative in the Union for controllers or processors established outside the Union, Article 27(2) foresees derogation from the mandatory designation of a representative in the Union, in two distinct cases: • processing is “occasional, does not include, on a large scale, processing of special categories of data as referred to in Article 9(1) or processing of personal data relating to criminal convictions and offences referred to in Article 10”, and such processing “is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, taking into account the nature, context, scope and purposes of the processing”. In line with positions taken previously by the Article 29 Working Party, the EPDB considers that a processing activity can only be considered as “occasional” if it is not carried out regularly, and occurs outside the regular course of business or activity of the controller or processor32. Furthermore, while the GDPR does not define what constitutes large-scale processing, the WP29 has previously recommended in its guidelines WP243 on data protection officers (DPOs) that the following factors, in particular, be considered when determining whether the processing is carried out on a large scale: the number of data subjects concerned - either as a specific number or as a 31 Part of the criteria and interpretation laid down in G29 WP243 rev.1 (Data Protection Officer) - endorsed by the EDPB can be used as a basis for the exemptions to the designation obligation. 32 WP29 position paper on the derogations from the obligation to maintain records of processing activities pursuant to Article 30(5) GDPR. --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted proportion of the relevant population; the volume of data and/or the range of different data items being processed; the duration, or permanence, of the data processing activity; the geographical extent of the processing activity33. Finally, the EDPB highlights that the exemption from the designation obligation as per Article 27 refers to processing “unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons”34, thus not limiting the exemption to processing unlikely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of data subjects. In line with Recital 75, when assessing the risk to the rights and freedom of data subjects, considerations should be given to both the likelihood and severity of the risk. Or • processing is carried out “by a public authority or body”. The qualification as a “public authority or body” for an entity established outside the Union will need to be assessed by supervisory authorities in concreto and on a case by case basis35. The EDPB notes that, given the nature of their tasks and missions, cases where a public authority or body in a third country would be offering goods or services to data subject in the Union, or would monitor their behaviour taking place within the Union, are likely to be limited. c) Establishment in one of the Member States where the data subjects whose personal data are processed Article 27(3) foresees that “the representative shall be established in one of the Member States where the data subjects, whose personal data are processed in relation to the offering of goods or services to them, or whose behaviour is monitored, are”. In cases where a significant proportion of data subjects whose personal data are processed are located in one particular Member State, the EDPB recommends, as a good practice, that the representative is established in that same Member State. However, the representative must remain easily accessible for data subjects in Member States where it is not established and where the services or goods are being offered or where the behaviour is being monitored. The EDPB confirms that the criterion for the establishment of the representative in the Union is the location of data subjects whose personal data are being processed. The place of processing, even by a processor established in another Member State, is here not a relevant factor for determining the location of the establishment of the representative. Example 25: An Indian pharmaceutical company, with neither business presence nor establishment in the Union and subject to the GDPR as per Article 3(2), sponsors clinical trials carried out by investigators (hospitals) in Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The majority of patients participating to the clinical trials are situated in Belgium. The Indian pharmaceutical company, as a data controller, shall designate a representative in the Union established in one of the three Member States where patients, as data subjects, are participating in the clinical trial (Belgium, Luxembourg or the Netherlands). Since most patients are Belgian residents, 33 WP29 guidelines on data protections officers (DPOs), adopted on 13th December 2016, as last revised on 5th April 2017, WP 243 rev.01 - endorsed by the EDPB. 34 Article 27(2)(a) GDPR. 35 The GDPR does not define what constitutes a ‘public authority or body’. The EDPB considers that such a notion is to be determined under national law. Accordingly, public authorities and bodies include national, regional and local authorities, but the concept, under the applicable national laws, typically also includes a range of other bodies governed by public law. --- PAGE 27 --- Adopted it is recommended that the representative is established in Belgium. Should this be the case, the representative in Belgium should however be easily accessible to data subjects and supervisory authorities in the Netherlands and Luxembourg. In this specific case, the representative in the Union could be the legal representative of the sponsor in the Union, as per Article 74 of Regulation (EU) 536/2014 on clinical trials, provided that it does not act as a data processor on behalf of the clinical trial sponsor, that it is established in one of the three Member States, and that both functions are governed by and exercised in compliance with each legal framework. c) Obligations and responsibilities of the representative The representative in the Union acts on behalf of the controller or processor it represents with regard to the controller or processor’s obligations under the GDPR. This implies notably the obligations relating to the exercise of data subject rights, and in this regard and as already stated, the identity and