be interpreted in the light of the specific nature of the economic activities and the provision of services concerned.' 12 Weltimmo, paragraph 25 and Google Spain, paragraph 53. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted personal data by this entity that the existence of the commercial activity in the EU would not be sufficient to bring the data processing by the non-EU entity within the scope of EU data protection law13. Consideration of the following two factors may help to determine whether the processing is being carried out by a controller or processor in the context of its establishment in the Union i) Relationship between a data controller or processor outside the Union and its local establishment in the Union The data processing activities of a data controller or processor established outside the EU may be inextricably linked to the activities of a local establishment in a Member State, and thereby may trigger the applicability of EU law, even if that local establishment is not actually taking any role in the data processing itself14. If a case by case analysis on the facts shows that there is an inextricable link between the processing of personal data carried out by a non-EU controller or processor and the activities of an EU establishment, EU law will apply to that processing by the non-EU entity, whether or not the EU establishment plays a role in that processing of data15. ii) Revenue raising in the Union Revenue-raising in the EU by a local establishment, to the extent that such activities can be considered as “inextricably linked” to the processing of personal data taking place outside the EU and individuals in the EU, may be indicative of processing by a non-EU controller or processor being carried out “in the context of the activities of the EU establishment”, and may be sufficient to result in the application of EU law to such processing16. The EDPB recommends that non-EU organisations undertake an assessment of their processing activities, first by determining whether personal data are being processed, and secondly by identifying potential links between the activity for which the data is being processed and the activities of any presence of the organisation in the Union. If such a link is identified, the nature of this link will be key in determining whether the GDPR applies to the processing in question, and must be assessed inter alia against the two elements listed above. Example 2: An e-commerce website is operated by a company based in China. The personal data processing activities of the company are exclusively carried out in China. The Chinese company has established a European office in Berlin in order to lead and implement commercial prospection and marketing campaigns towards EU markets. In this case, it can be considered that the activities of the European office in Berlin are inextricably linked to the processing of personal data carried out by the Chinese e-commerce website, insofar as 13 G29 WP 179 update - Update of Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law in light of the CJEU judgment in Google Spain, 16th December 2015 14 CJEU, Google Spain, Case C‐131/12 15 G29 WP 179 update - Update of Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law in light of the CJEU judgment in Google Spain, 16th December 2015 16 This may potentially be the case, for example, for any foreign operator with a sales office or some other presence in the EU, even if that office has no role in the actual data processing, in particular where the processing takes place in the context of the sales activity in the EU and the activities of the establishment are aimed at the inhabitants of the Member States in which the establishment is located (WP179 update). --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted the commercial prospection and marketing campaign towards EU markets notably serve to make the service offered by the e-commerce website profitable. The processing of personal data by the Chinese company in relation to EU sales is indeed inextricably linked to the activities of the European office in Berlin relating to commercial prospection and marketing campaign towards EU market. The processing of personal data by the Chinese company in connection with EU sales can therefore be considered as carried out in the context of the activities of the European office, as an establishment in the Union. This processing activity by the Chinese company will therefore be subject to the provisions of the GDPR as per its Article 3(1)”. Example 3: A hotel and resort chain in South Africa offers package deals through its website, available in English, German, French and Spanish. The company does not have any office, representation or stable arrangement in the EU. In this case, in the absence of any representation or stable arrangement of the hotel and resort chain within the territory of the Union, it appears that no entity linked to this data controller in South Africa can qualify as an establishment in the EU within the meaning of the GDPR. Therefore the processing at stake cannot be subject to the provisions of the GDPR, as per Article 3(1). However, it must be analysed in concreto whether the processing carried out by this data controller established outside the EU can be subject to the GDPR, as per Article 3(2). c) Application of the GDPR to the establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union, regardless of whether the processing takes place in the Union or not As per Article 3(1), the processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union triggers the application of the GDPR and the related obligations for the data controller or processor concerned. The text of the GDPR specifies that the Regulation applies to processing in the context of the activities of an establishment in the EU “regardless of whether the processing takes place in the Union or not”. It is the presence, through an establishment, of a data controller or processor in the EU and the fact that a processing takes place in the context of the activities of this establishment that trigger the application of the GDPR to its processing activities. The place of processing is therefore not relevant in determining whether or not the processing, carried out in the context of the activities of an EU establishment, falls within the scope of the GDPR. Example 4: A French company has developed a car-sharing application exclusively addressed to customers in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. The service is only available in those three countries but all personal data processing activities are carried out by the data controller in France. While the collection of personal data takes place in non-EU countries, the subsequent processing of personal data in this case is carried out in the context of the activities of an establishment of a data controller in the Union. Therefore, even though processing relates to personal data of data subjects who are not in the Union, the provisions of the GDPR will apply to the processing carried out by the French company, as per Article 3(1). Example 5: A pharmaceutical company with headquarters in Stockholm has located all its personal data processing activities with regards to its clinical trial data in its branch based in Singapore. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted In this case, while the processing activities are taking place in Singapore, that processing is carried out in the context of the activities of the pharmaceutical company in Stockholm i.e. of a data controller established in the Union. The provisions of the GDPR therefore apply to such processing, as per Article 3(1). In determining the territorial scope of the GDPR, geographical location will be important under Article 3(1) with regard to the place of establishment of: - the controller or processor itself (is it established inside or outside the Union?); - any business presence of a non-EU controller or processor (does it have an establishment in the Union?) However, geographical location is not important for the purposes of Article 3(1) with regard to the place in which processing is carried out, or with regard to the location of the data subjects in question. The text of Article 3(1) does not restrict the application of the GDPR to the processing of personal data of individuals who are in the Union. The EDPB therefore considers that any personal data processing in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or processor in the Union would fall under the scope of the GDPR, regardless of the location or the nationality of the data subject whose personal data are being processed. This approach is supported by Recital 14 of the GDPR which states that “[t]he protection afforded by this Regulation should apply to natural persons, whatever their nationality or place of residence, in relation to the processing of their personal data.” d) Application of the establishment criterion to controller and processor As far as processing activities falling under the scope of Article 3(1)