--- PAGE 1 --- Adopted Guidelines 3/2018 on the territorial scope of the GDPR (Article 3) Version 2.0 12 November 2019 --- PAGE 2 --- Adopted Version history Version 2.0 12 November 2019 Adoption of the Guidelines after public consultation Version 1.0 16 November 2018 Adoption of the Guidelines for publication consultation --- PAGE 3 --- Adopted Contents Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 4 Application of the establishment criterion - Art 3(1)....................................................................... 5 Application of the targeting criterion – Art 3(2) ............................................................................ 13 Processing in a place where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law ..... 22 Representative of controllers or processors not established in the Union ................................... 23 --- PAGE 4 --- Adopted The European Data Protection Board Having regard to Article 70 (1)(e) of the Regulation 2016/679/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC. HAS ADOPTED THE FOLLOWING GUIDELINES: INTRODUCTION The territorial scope of General Data Protection Regulation1 (the GDPR or the Regulation) is determined by Article 3 of the Regulation and represents a significant evolution of the EU data protection law compared to the framework defined by Directive 95/46/EC2. In part, the GDPR confirms choices made by the EU legislator and the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) in the context of Directive 95/46/EC. However, important new elements have been introduced. Most importantly, the main objective of Article 4 of the Directive was to define which Member State’s national law is applicable, whereas Article 3 of the GDPR defines the territorial scope of a directly applicable text. Moreover, while Article 4 of the Directive made reference to the ‘use of equipment’ in the Union’s territory as a basis for bringing controllers who were “not established on Community territory” within the scope of EU data protection law, such a reference does not appear in Article 3 of the GDPR. Article 3 of the GDPR reflects the legislator’s intention to ensure comprehensive protection of the rights of data subjects in the EU and to establish, in terms of data protection requirement, a level playing field for companies active on the EU markets, in a context of worldwide data flows. Article 3 of the GDPR defines the territorial scope of the Regulation on the basis of two main criteria: the “establishment” criterion, as per Article 3(1), and the “targeting” criterion as per Article 3(2). Where one of these two criteria is met, the relevant provisions of the GDPR will apply to relevant processing of personal data by the controller or processor concerned. In addition, Article 3(3) confirms the application of the GDPR to the processing where Member State law applies by virtue of public international law. Through a common interpretation by data protection authorities in the EU, these guidelines seek to ensure a consistent application of the GDPR when assessing whether particular processing by a controller or a processor falls within the scope of the new EU legal framework. In these guidelines, the EDPB sets out and clarifies the criteria for determining the application of the territorial scope of the GDPR. Such a common interpretation is also essential for controllers and processors, both within and outside the EU, so that they may assess whether they need to comply with the GDPR for a given processing activity. As controllers or processors not established in the EU but engaging in processing activities falling within Article 3(2) are required to designate a representative in the Union, these guidelines will also provide 1 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation). 2 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data. --- PAGE 5 --- Adopted clarification on the process for the designation of this representative under Article 27 and its responsibilities and obligations. As a general principle, the EDPB asserts that where the processing of personal data falls within the territorial scope of the GDPR, all provisions of the Regulation apply to such processing. These guidelines will specify the various scenarios that may arise, depending on the type of processing activities, the entity carrying out these processing activities or the location of such entities, and will detail the provisions applicable to each situation. It is therefore essential that controllers and processors, especially those offering goods and services at international level, undertake a careful and in concreto assessment of their processing activities, in order to determine whether the related processing of personal data falls under the scope of the GDPR. The EDPB underlines that the application of Article 3 aims at determining whether a particular processing activity, rather than a person (legal or natural), falls within the scope of the GDPR. Consequently, certain processing of personal data by a controller or processor might fall within the scope of the Regulation, while other processing of personal data by that same controller or processor might not, depending on the processing activity. These guidelines, initially adopted by the EDPB on 16 November, have been submitted to a public consultation from 23rd November 2018 to 18th January 2019 and have been updated taking into account the contributions and feedback received. 1 APPLICATION OF THE ESTABLISHMENT CRITERION - ART 3(1) Article 3(1) of the GDPR provides that the “Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in the context of the activities of an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union, regardless of whether the processing takes place in the Union or not.” Article 3(1) GDPR makes reference not only to an establishment of a controller, but also to an establishment of a processor. As a result, the processing of personal data by a processor may also be subject to EU law by virtue of the processor having an establishment located within the EU. Article 3(1) ensures that the GDPR applies to the processing by a controller or processor carried out in the context of the activities of an establishment of that controller or processor in the Union, regardless of the actual place of the processing. The EDPB therefore recommends a threefold approach in determining whether or not the processing of personal data falls within the scope of the GDPR pursuant to Article 3(1). The following sections clarify the application of the establishment criterion, first by considering the definition of an ‘establishment’ in the EU within the meaning of EU data protection law, second by looking at what is meant by ‘processing in the context of the activities of an establishment in the Union’, and lastly by confirming that the GDPR will apply regardless of whether the processing carried out in the context of the activities of this establishment takes place in the Union or not. a) “An establishment in the Union” Before considering what is meant by “an establishment in the Union” it is first necessary to identify who is the controller or processor for a given processing activity. According to the definition in Article 4(7) of the GDPR, controller means “the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data”. A processor, according to Article 4(8) of the GDPR, is “a natural or legal person, public authority, --- PAGE 6 --- Adopted agency or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller”. As established by relevant CJEU case law and previous WP29 opinion3, the determination of whether an entity is a controller or processor for the purposes of EU data protection law is a key element in the assessment of the application of the GDPR to the personal data processing in question. While the notion of “main establishment” is defined in Article 4(16), the GDPR does not provide a definition of “establishment” for the purpose of Article 34. However, Recital 225 clarifies that an “[e]stablishment implies the effective and real exercise of activities through stable arrangements. The legal form of such arrangements, whether through a branch or a subsidiary with a legal personality, is not the determining factor in that respect.” This wording is identical to that found in Recital 19 of Directive 95/46/EC, to which reference has been made in several CJEU rulings broadening the interpretation of the term “establishment”, departing from a formalistic approach whereby undertakings are established solely in the place where they are registered6. Indeed, the CJEU ruled that the notion of establishment extends to any real and effective activity — even a minimal one — exercised through stable arrangements7. In order to determine whether an entity based outside the Union has an