require each of them to have access to the personal data concerned. 52 The EDPB recalls that actual access to personal data is not a prerequisite for joint responsibility.53 B. Legal basis As joint controllers, both parties (the social media provider and the targeter) must be able to demonstrate the existence of a legal basis (Article 6 GDPR) to justify the processing of personal data for which each of the joint controllers is responsible. The EDPB recalls that no specific hierarchy is made between the different lawful basis of the GDPR: the controller needs to ensure that the selected lawful basis matches the objective and context of the processing operation in question. The identification of the appropriate lawful basis is tied to principles of fairness and purpose limitation.54 Generally speaking, there are two legal bases which could justify the processing that supports the targeting of social media users: data subject’s consent (Article 6(1)(a) GDPR) or legitimate interests (Article 6(1)(f) GDPR). A controller must always consider what the appropriate legal basis is under the given circumstances. In respect to the social media providers Article 6 (1) b GDPR cannot provide a lawful basis for online advertising simply because such advertising indirectly funds the provision of their service. 55 The same applies to the targeter as targeting of social media users cannot be considered as an intrinsic aspect of any services or necessary to perform a contract with the user.56 While personalisation of content may, in certain circumstances, constitute an intrinsic and expected 51 See also Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, para. 74 (“[a] natural or legal person cannot be considered to be a controller, within the meaning of that provision, in the context of operations that precede or are subsequent in the overall chain of processing for which that person does not determine either the purposes or the means”) and paragraph 101. 52 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, para. 38 - ECLI:EU:C:2018:388; Judgment in Jehovah’s Witnesses, C-25/17, para. 69 - ECLI:EU:C:2018:551. 53 CJEU Judgment 10 July 2018 (C-25/17, para. 68 to 72). 54 See paragraph 18, Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, 8 October 2019, available at https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-b- adopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf 55See para. 52, 53, Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, 8 October 2019, available at https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-b- adopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf 56 There would be a lack of necessity if the targeter were to switch to social media providers despite a direct contractual relationship with its customer and thus the possibility of direct advertising. --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted element of certain online services57, Article 6 (1) b GDPR in the context of targeting of social media users is hardly applicable, as illustrated in the examples of these Guidelines.58 For what concerns the legitimate interest lawful basis, the EDPB recalls that in Fashion ID, the CJEU reiterated that in order for a processing to rely on the legitimate interest, three cumulative conditions should be met, namely59 (i) the pursuit of a legitimate interest by the data controller or by the third party or parties to whom the data are disclosed, (ii) the need to process personal data for the purposes of the legitimate interests pursued, and (iii) the condition that the fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject whose data require protection do not take precedence. The CJEU also specified that in a situation of joint controllership “it is necessary that each of those controllers should pursue a legitimate interest [...] through those processing operations in order for those operations to be justified in respect of each of them”.60 With regard to Example 1, the targeter might consider its legitimate interest to be the economic interest of having an increased publicity for its goods through social media targeting. The social media provider could consider that its legitimate interest consists of making the social media service profitable by selling advertising space. Whether the targeter and the social media provider can rely upon Article 6(1)(f) GDPR as legal basis depends on whether all three cumulative conditions are met, as recently reiterated by the CJEU. Even if the targeter and the social media provider consider their economic interests to be legitimate, it does not necessarily mean that they will be able to actually rely on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR. The second part of the balancing test entails that the joint controllers will need to establish that the processing is necessary to achieve those legitimate interests. “Necessary” requires a connection between the processing and the interests pursued. The ‘necessity’ requirement is particularly relevant in the context of the application of Article 6(1)f, in order to ensure that processing of data based on legitimate interests does not lead to an unduly broad interpretation of the necessity to process data. As in other cases, this means that it should be considered whether other less invasive means are available to serve the same end.61 The third step in assessing whether the targeter and the social media provider can rely upon Article 6(1)(f) GDPR as legal basis for the processing of personal data, is the balancing exercise necessary to determine whether the legitimate interest at stake is overridden by the data subject’s interests or fundamental rights and freedoms.62 57 See p. 15 , Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, 8 October 2019, available at https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-b- adopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf 58 Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, para 57. 59 CJEU, Judgment in Fashion ID, 29 July 2019, C-40/17, para. 95 - ECLI:EU:C:2019:629. 60 Idem, para 97. 61 Article 29 Working Party Opinion 06/2014 on the concept of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7 of Directive 95/46/EC, WP217, 9 April 2014, p. 29. 62 When assessing the impact on the interests, fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual concerned, the following considerations are particularly relevant in the context of targeting directed to users of social media (i) the purposes of the targeting, (ii) the level of detail of the targeting criteria used (e.g., a broadly described cohort such as ‘people with an interest in English literature’, or more detailed criteria to allow segmentation and targeting on a more granular level), (iii) the type (and combination) of targeting criteria used (i.e. whether the targeting only focuses on a small aspect of the data subject, or is more comprehensive in nature), and (iv) the nature (sensitivity), volume and source of the data used in order to develop the targeting criteria. See Article 29 Working Party Opinion 06/2014 on the concept of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7 of --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted The EDPB recalls that in cases where a controller envisages to rely on legitimate interest, the duties of transparency and the right to object require careful consideration. Data subjects should be given the opportunity to object to the processing of their data for targeted purposes before the processing is initiated. Users of social media should not only be provided with the possibility to object to the display of targeted advertising when accessing the platform, but also be provided with controls that ensure the underlying processing of his or her personal data for the targeting purpose no longer takes place after he or she has objected. The targeter seeking to rely on legitimate interest should, for its part, make it easy for individuals to express a prior objection to its use of social media for targeting purposes. However, insofar as the targeter does not have any direct interaction with the data subject, the targeter should at least ensure that the social media platform provide the data subject with means to efficiently express their right to prior objection. As joint controllers, the targeter and social media provider should clarify how the individuals’ right to object (as well as other rights) will be accommodated in the context of the joint arrangement (see section 6). If the balancing exercise points out that data subject’s interests or fundamental rights and freedoms override the legitimate interest of the social media provider and the targeter, the use of Article 6(1)(f) is not possible. For what concerns the consent lawful basis, the controller needs to keep in mind that there are clearly situations in which the processing would not be lawful without the valid consent of the individuals concerned (Article 6(1)(a) GDPR). For example, the WP29 has previously considered that it would be difficult for controllers to justify using legitimate interests as a legal basis for intrusive profiling and tracking practices for marketing or advertising purposes, for example those that involve tracking individuals across multiple websites, locations, devices, services or data-brokering.63 To be valid, the consent collected for the processing needs to