example, a social media provider or a targeter might infer that an individual is likely to be interested in a certain activity or product on the basis of his or her web browsing behaviour and/or network connections. 5.2 Targeting on the basis of provided data 5.2.1 Data provided by the user to the social media provider Individuals may actively disclose a great deal of information about themselves when making use of social media. The creation of a social media account (or “profile”) involves disclosure of a number of attributes, which may include name, date of birth, gender, place of residence, language, etc. Depending on the nature of the social media platform, users may include additional information such as relationship status, interests or current employment. Personal data provided by social media users can be used by the social media provider to develop criteria, which enables the targeter to address specific messages at the users of the social media. Example 1: Company X sells gentlemen’s shoes and wishes to promote a sale of its winter collection. For its advertising campaign, it wishes to target men between the age of 30 and 45 who have indicated that they are single in their social media profile. It uses the corresponding targeting criteria offered by the social media provider as parameters to identify the target audience to whom its advertisement should be displayed. Moreover, the targeter indicates that the advertisement should be displayed to social media users while they are using the social media service between the hours of 5pm and 8pm. To enable targeting of social media users on the basis of specific criteria, the social media provider has previously determined which types of personal data shall be used in order to develop the targeting criteria and which targeting criteria shall be offered. The social media provider also communicates certain statistical information once the advertisements has been displayed to the targeter (e.g. to report on the demographic composition of individuals that interacted with the advertisement). A. Roles In Example 1, both the targeter and the social media provider participate in determining the purpose and means of the processing personal data. This results in the display of the advertisement to the target audience. 44 Idem. --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted As far as the determination of purpose is concerned, Company X and the social media provider jointly determine the purpose of the processing, which is to display a specific advertisement to a set of individuals (in this case social media users) who make up the target audience, by choosing available targeting criteria associated with these users in order to reach a likely interested audience and to provide them more relevant advertisement content. Moreover, there is also mutual benefit arising from the same processing operation, which is an additional indicator that the purposes pursued by given Company X and the social media provider are inextricably be linked.45 As far as the determination of means is concerned, the targeter and the social media provider jointly determine the means, which results in the targeting. The targeter participates in the determination of the means by choosing to use the services offered by the social media provider46, and by requesting it to target an audience based on certain criteria (i.e. age range, relationship status, timing of display).47 In doing so, the targeter defines the criteria in accordance with which the targeting takes place and designates the categories of persons whose personal data is to be made use of. The social media provider, on the other hand, has decided to process personal data of its users in such a manner to develop the targeting criteria, which it makes available to the targeter.48 In order to do so, the social media provider has made certain decisions regarding the essential means of the processing, such as which categories of data shall be processed, which targeting criteria shall be offered and who shall have access (to what types of) personal data that is processed in the context of a particular targeting campaign.49 For the sake of completeness, the EDPB notes that the social media provider does not qualify as a processor as defined in Article 4 (8) GDPR. 50 In Example 1, the targeting criteria, as developed by the social media provider on the basis of user’s’ personal data can be used by the social media provider for future processing operations, which demonstrates that the later cannot qualify as a processor. Moreover, the social media provider does not appear to exclusively process the data on behalf of Company X and in accordance with its instructions. The joint control among the targeter and social media provider only extends to those processing operations for which they effectively co-determine the purposes and means. It extends to the processing of personal data resulting from the selection of the relevant targeting criteria and the display of the advertisement to the target audience. It also covers the processing of personal data 45 See EDPB Guidelines 7/2020 on concepts of the controller and the processor in the GDPR, para. 60 (“In addition, when the entities do not have the same purpose for the processing, joint controllership may also, in light of the CJEU case law, be established when the entities involved pursue purposes which are closely linked or complementary. Such may be the case, for example, when there is a mutual benefit arising from the same processing operation, provided that each of the entities involved participates in the determination of the purposes and means of the relevant processing operation”). 46 See EDPB Guidelines 7/2020 on concepts of the controller and the processor in the GDPR, para. 67 (“Furthermore, the choice made by an entity to use for its own purposes a tool or other system developed by another entity, allowing the processing of personal data, will likely amount to a joint decision on the means of that processing by those entities. This follows from the Fashion ID case where the CJEU concluded, that by embedding on its website the Facebook Like button made available by Facebook to website operators, Fashion ID has exerted a decisive influence in respect of the operations involving the collection and transmission of the personal data of the visitors of its website to Facebook and had thus jointly determined with Facebook the means of that processing”). 47 See in this respect Wirtschaftsakademie, C‐210/16, para. 39 - ECLI:EU:C:2018:388. 48 See in the same vein also Fashion ID, C-40/17, para. 80: “those processing operations are performed in the economic interests of both Fashion ID and Facebook Ireland, for whom the fact that it can use those data for its own commercial purposes is the consideration for the benefit to Fashion ID”. 49 See Opinion 1/2010. 50 See EDPB Guidelines 7/2020 on concepts of the controller and the processor in the GDPR. --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted undertaken by the social media provider to report to the targeter about the results of the targeting campaign. The joint control does not, however, extend to operations involving the processing of personal data at other stages occurring before the selection of the relevant targeting criteria or after the targeting and reporting has been completed (e.g. the development of new targeting criteria by the social media provider on the basis of completed targeting campaigns) and in which the targeter has not participated in determining the purposes and means, likewise the social media provider, in principle, does not participate in phase of planning a targeting campaign prior to the moment where the targeter makes contact with the social media provider”.51 The above analysis remains the same even if the targeter only specifies the parameters of its intended audience and does not have access to the personal data of the users that are affected. Indeed, joint responsibility of several actors for the same processing does not require each of them to have access to the personal data concerned. 52 The EDPB recalls that actual access to personal data is not a prerequisite for joint responsibility.53 B. Legal basis As joint controllers, both parties (the social media provider and the targeter) must be able to demonstrate the existence of a legal basis (Article 6 GDPR) to justify the processing of personal data for which each of the joint controllers is responsible. The EDPB recalls that no specific hierarchy is made between the different lawful basis of the GDPR: the controller needs to ensure that the selected lawful basis matches the objective and context of the processing operation in question. The identification of the appropriate lawful basis is tied to principles of fairness and purpose limitation.54 Generally speaking, there are two legal bases which could justify the processing that supports the targeting of social media users: data subject’s consent (Article 6(1)(a) GDPR) or legitimate interests (Article 6(1)(f) GDPR). A controller must always consider what the appropriate legal basis is under the given circumstances. In respect to the social media providers Article 6 (1) b GDPR cannot provide a lawful basis for online advertising simply because such advertising indirectly