rev. 01, p. 9. See, for example: https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb-2019-03-13-statement-on- elections_en.pdf; https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2018/07/findings- recommendations-and-actions-from-ico-investigation-into-data-analytics-in-political-campaigns/; https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/soteu2018-data-protection-law-electoral-guidance- 638_en.pdf; https://www.personuvernd.is/information-in-english/greinar/nr/2880. 7 CJEU, Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, 5 June 2018, C-210/16, ECLI:EU:C:2018:388; CJEU, Judgment in Fashion ID, 29 July 2019, C-40/17, ECLI:EU:C:2019:629. 8 The present guidance is without prejudice to the EDPB Guidelines 07/2020 on the concepts of controller and processor under the GDPR adopted on 07 July 2021, concerning the distribution of responsibilities in other contexts. --- PAGE 6 --- Adopted The main aim of these guidelines is therefore to clarify the roles and responsibilities among the social media provider and the targeter. In order to do so, the guidelines also identify the potential risks for the rights and freedoms of individuals (section 3), the main actors and their roles (section 4), and tackle the application of key data protection requirements (such as lawfulness and transparency, DPIA, etc.) as well as key elements of arrangements between social media providers and the targeters. Nevertheless, the scope of these Guidelines covers the relationships between the registered users of a social network, its providers, as well as the targeters. Thorough analysis, of scenarios, such as individuals that are not-registered with social media providers does not fall under the scope of the present guidelines. RISKS TO THE RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF USERS POSED BY THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA The GDPR underlines the importance of properly evaluating and mitigating any risks to the rights and freedoms of individuals resulting from the processing of personal data.9 The mechanisms that can be used to target social media users, as well as the underlying processing activities that enable targeting, may pose significant risks. These guidelines do not seek to provide an exhaustive list of the possible risks to the rights and freedoms of individuals. Nonetheless, the EDPB considers it important to point out certain types of risks and to provide a number of examples how they may manifest themselves. Targeting of social media users may involve uses of personal data that go against or beyond individuals’ reasonable expectations and thereby infringes applicable data protection principles and rules. For example, where a social media platform combines personal data from third-party sources with data disclosed by the users of its platform, this may result in personal data being used beyond their initial purpose and in ways the individual could not reasonably anticipate. The profiling activities that are connected to targeting might involve an inference of interests or other characteristics, which the individual had not actively disclosed, thereby undermining the individual’s ability to exercise control over his or her personal data.10 Moreover, a lack of transparency regarding the role of the different actors and the processing operations involved may undermine, complicate or hinder the exercise of data subject rights. A second type of risk concerns the possibility of discrimination and exclusion. Targeting of social media users may involve criteria that, directly or indirectly, have discriminatory effects relating to an individual’s racial or ethnic origin, health status or sexual orientation, or other protected qualities of the individual concerned. For example, the use of such criteria in the context of advertising related to job offers, housing or credit (loans, mortgages) may reduce the visibility of opportunities to persons within certain groups of individuals. The potential for discrimination in targeting arises from the ability for advertisers to leverage the extensive quantity and variety of personal data (e.g. demographics, 9 According to Article 24 of the GDPR, the controller shall implement appropriate technical and organizational measures to ensure and be able to demonstrate that processing is performed in accordance with the GDPR, “taking into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as well as the risks of varying likelihood and severity for the rights and freedoms of natural persons”. See also Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, WP248 rev. 01, 4 October 2017. 10 See also European Data Protection Supervisor, EDPS Opinion on online manipulation, Opinion 3/2018, 19 March 2018, p. 15 (“The concern of using data from profiles for different purposes through algorithms is that the data loses its original context. Repurposing of data is likely to affect a person’s informational self-determination, further reduce the control of data subjects’ over their data, thus affecting the trust in digital environments and services.”). --- PAGE 7 --- Adopted behavioral data and interests) that social media platforms gather about their users.11 Recent research suggests that the potential for discriminatory effects exists also without using criteria that are directly linked to special categories of personal data in the sense of Article 9 of the GDPR.12 A second category of risk relates to potential possible manipulation of users. Targeting mechanisms are, by definition, used in order to influence the behaviour and choices of individuals, whether it be in terms of their purchasing decisions as consumers or in terms of their political decisions as citizens engaged in civic life.13 Certain targeting approaches may however go so far as to undermine individual autonomy and freedom (e.g. by delivering individualized messages designed to exploit or even accentuate certain vulnerabilities, personal values or concerns). For example, an analysis of content shared through social media can reveal information about the emotional state (e.g. through an analysis of the use of certain key words). Such information could be used to target the individual with specific messages and at specific moments to which he or she is expected to be more receptive, thereby surreptitiously influencing his or her thought process, emotions and behaviour.14 Mechanisms to target social media users can also be used to unduly influence individuals when it comes to political discourse and democratic electoral processes.15 While ‘traditional’ offline political campaigning intends to influence voters’ behaviour via messages that are generally available and retrievable (verifiable), the available online targeting mechanisms enable political parties and campaigns to target individual voters with tailored messages, specific to the particular needs, interests and values of the target audience.16 Such targeting might even involve disinformation or messages that individuals find particularly distressing, and are therefore (more) likely to stimulate a certain emotion or reaction by them. When polarising or untruthful (disinformation) messages are targeted at specific individuals, with no or limited contextualisation or exposure to other viewpoints, the use of targeting mechanisms can have the effect of undermining the democratic electoral process.17 In the same vein, the use of algorithms to determine which information is displayed to which individuals may adversely affect the likelihood of access to diversified sources of information in relation to a particular subject matter. This may in turn have negative consequences for the pluralism of public debate and access to information.18 Targeting mechanisms can be used to augment the visibility of certain messages, while giving less prominence to others. The potential adverse impact may be felt at two levels. On the one hand, there are risks related to so-called ‘filter-bubbles’ where people are exposed to ‘more-of-the-same’ information and encounter fewer opinions, resulting in increased 11 T. Speicher a.o., Potential for Discrimination in Online Targeted Advertising, Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research PMLR 81:5-19, 2018, http://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/speicher18a.html. 12 Idem. 13 European Data Protection Supervisor, Opinion 3/2018, p. 18. 14 See ‘Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks’, Adam D. I. Kramer, Jamie E. Guillory, and Jeffrey T. Hancock, PNAS June 17, 2014 111 (24) 8788-8790; first published June 2, 2014 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1320040111, available at: https://www.pnas.org/content/111/24/8788 Adam D. I. Kramer Core Data Science Team, Facebook, Inc., Menlo Park, CA 94025. 15 See also European Data Protection Board, Statement 2/2019 on the use of personal data in the course of political campaigns, 13 March 2019, p. 1. 16 Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), Democracy disrupted? Personal information and political influence, 10 July 2018, p. 14. 17 See also European Commission, Commission Guidance on the application of Union data protection law in the electoral context, A contribution from the European Commission to the Leaders’ meeting in Salzburg on 19-20 September 2018. See also L.M. Neudert and N.M. Marchal, Polarisation and the use of technology in political campaigns and communication, European Parliamentary Research Service, 2019, p. 22-24. 18 See also European Parliament resolution of 3 May 2018 on media pluralism and media freedom in the European Union. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted political and ideological polarisation.19 On the other hand, targeting mechanisms may also create risks of “information overload”, whereby individuals cannot make an informed decision because they have too much information and cannot tell if it is reliable. The collection of personal data by social media providers may not be limited to the activities performed by individuals on the social media platform itself. The targeting of social media users on the basis of information concerning their browsing behaviour or other activities outside the social media platform can give individuals the feeling that their behaviour is systematically being monitored. This may have a chilling effect on freedom of expression, including access to information.20 Such