of personal data and to different degrees, so that the level of responsibility of each of them must be assessed with regard to all the relevant circumstances of the particular case.”34 While concluding that the administrator of a page acts as a controller, jointly with Facebook, the CJEU also noted that in the present case, Facebook must be regarded as primarily determining the purposes and means of processing the personal data of users of Facebook and persons visiting the fan pages hosted on Facebook.35 In Fashion ID, the CJEU decided that a website operator can be a considered a controller when it embeds a Facebook social plugin on its website that causes the browser of a visitor to transmit personal data of the visitor to Facebook.36 The qualification of the website operator as controller is, however, limited to the operation or set of operations in respect of which it actually determines the purposes and means. In this particular case, the CJEU considered that the website operator is only capable of determining, jointly with Facebook, the purposes and means of the collection and disclosure by transmission of the personal data of visitors to its website. As a result, the CJEU ruled that, for what concerns the embedding of a social plug-in within a website, the liability of the website operator is: “limited to the operation or set of operations involving the processing of personal data in respect of which it actually determines the purposes and means, that is to say, the collection and disclosure by transmission of the data at issue.”37 The CJEU considered that the website operator was not a controller for subsequent38 operations involving the processing of personal data carried out by Facebook after their transmission to the latter, as the website operator was not in a position to determine the purposes and means of those operations by virtue of embedding the social plug-in: “By contrast, in the light of that information, it seems, at the outset, impossible that Fashion ID determines the purposes and means of subsequent operations involving the processing of personal data carried out by Facebook Ireland after their transmission to the latter, meaning that Fashion ID cannot be considered to be a controller in respect of those operations [...]”.39 In case of joint controllership, pursuant to Article 26(1) GDPR, controllers are required to put in place an arrangement which, in a transparent manner, determines their respective responsibilities for 34 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, paragraph 43; Judgment in Jehovah’s Witnesses, C-25/17, paragraph 66 and Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, paragraph 70. 35 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, paragraph 30. 36 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, paragraph 75 and following and paragraph 107. 37 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, paragraph 107. 38 Subsequent processing is any processing operation or set of processing operations which follows (i.e. takes place after) the data collection. In Fashion ID, the term is used to refer to processing operations carried out by Facebook after their transmission and for which Fashion ID should not be considered as a joint controller (because it does not effectively participate in determining the purposes and means of those processing). Subsequent processing for a purpose other than that for which the personal data have been collected is only permissible insofar as Article 6(4) GDPR relating to further processing is complied with. For example, if an online retailer collects data relating to an individual’s home address, a subsequent processing would consist in the storage or later deletion of this information. However, if this online retailer later decides to process this personal data to enrich the profile of the data subject for targeting purposes, this would amount to further processing within the meaning of Article 6(4) GDPR as it involves processing for a purpose other than that for which they were initially collected. 39 Judgment in Fashion ID, C-40/17, paragraph 76. --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted compliance with the GDPR, in particular as regards the exercising of the rights of the data subject and their respective duties to provide the information referred to in Articles 13 and 14 GDPR. The following sections clarify, by way of specific examples, the roles of targeters and social media providers in relation to different targeting mechanisms. Specific considerations are given in particular as to how the requirements of lawfulness and purpose limitation apply in this context. Next, the requirements concerning transparency, data protection impact assessments and the processing of special categories of data are analysed. Finally, the Guidelines address the obligation for joint controllers to put in place an appropriate arrangement pursuant to Article 26 GDPR, taking into account the degree of responsibility of the targeter and of the social media provider. ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT TARGETING MECHANISMS 5.1 Overview Social media users may be targeted on the basis of provided, observed or inferred data, as well as a combination thereof: a) Targeting individuals on the basis of provided data – “Provided data” refers to information actively provided by the data subject to the social media provider and/or the targeter.40 For example:  A social media user might indicate his or her age in the description of his or her user profile. The social media provider, in turn, might enable targeting on the basis of this criterion.  A targeter might use information provided by the data subject to the targeter in order to target that individual specifically, for example by means of customer data (such as an e- mail address list), to be matched with data already held on the social media platform, leading to all those users who match being targeted with advertising41. b) Targeting on the basis of observed data – Targeting of social media users can also take place on the basis of observed data.42 Observed data are data provided by the data subject by virtue of using a service or device.43 For example, a particular social media user might be targeted on the basis of:  his or her activity on the social media platform itself (for instance the content that the user has shared, consulted or liked);  the use of devices on which the social media’s application is executed (for instance GPS coordinates, mobile telephone number); 40 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on the right to data portability, WP 242 rev.01, 5 April 2017, p. 10. 41 See for example the decision by the Higher Administrative Court of Bavaria h (Germany), Beschluss v.26.09.2018 – 5 CS 18.1157, www.gesetze-bayern.de/Content/Document/Y-300-Z-BECKRS-B-2018-N-25018. 42 In its Opinion 2/2010 on online behavioural advertising the WP29 noted that “there are two main approaches to building user profiles: i) Predictive profiles are established by inference from observing individual and collective user behaviour over time, particularly by monitoring visited pages and ads viewed or clicked on. ii) Explicit profiles are created from personal data that data subjects themselves provide to a web service, such as by registering” (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 2/2010 on online behavioural advertising, WP 171, p. 7). 43 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on the right to data portability, WP 242 rev.01, 5 April 2017, p. 10. --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted  data obtained by a third-party application developer by using the application programming interfaces (APIs) or software development kits (SDKs) offered by social media providers;  data collected through third-party websites that have incorporated social plugins or pixels;  data collected through other third parties (e.g. parties with whom the data subject has interacted, purchased a product, subscribed to loyalty cards); or  data collected through services offered by companies owned or operated by the social media provider. c) Targeting on the basis of inferred data – “Inferred data” or “derived data” are created by the data controller on the basis of the data provided by the data subject or as observed by the controller.44 For example, a social media provider or a targeter might infer that an individual is likely to be interested in a certain activity or product on the basis of his or her web browsing behaviour and/or network connections. 5.2 Targeting on the basis of provided data 5.2.1 Data provided by the user to the social media provider Individuals may actively disclose a great deal of information about themselves when making use of social media. The creation of a social media account (or “profile”) involves disclosure of a number of attributes, which may include name, date of birth, gender, place of residence, language, etc. Depending on the nature of the social media platform, users may include additional information such as relationship status, interests or current employment. Personal data provided by social media users can be used by the social media provider to develop criteria, which enables the targeter to address specific messages at the users of the social media. Example 1: Company X sells gentlemen’s shoes and wishes to promote a sale of its winter collection. For its advertising campaign, it wishes to target men between the age of 30 and 45 who have indicated that they are single in their social