people. Additional risks may emerge depending on the purposes of the advertising campaign and its intrusiveness, or if the targeting involves the processing of observed, inferred or derived personal data. In addition to the obligations specifically referred to in Article 26 (1) GDPR, joint controllers should also consider other obligations when determining their respective obligations. As stated in the EDPB guidelines on DPIAs “When the processing operation involves joint controllers, they need to define their respective obligations precisely”. As a consequence, both joint controllers need to assess whether a DPIA is necessary. If a DPIA is necessary, they are both responsible for fulfilling this obligation. The EDPB recalls that the DPIA should tackle the entire processing of personal data, which means that in principle both joint controllers need to take part in the realization of the DPIA. In this context, both controllers need to ensure that they have a sufficient level of information on the processing to carry out the required DPIA.99This implies that “each data controller should express his needs and share useful information without either compromising secrets (e.g.: protection of trade secrets, intellectual property, confidential business information) or disclosing vulnerabilities”.100 In practice, it is possible that joint controllers decide that one of them shall be tasked with carrying out the DPIA as such. This should then be specified in the joint arrangement, without prejudice to the existence of joint responsibility as such. It may indeed be that one of the controllers is better placed to assess certain processing operations. For example, this controller may, depending on the context, 98 See EDPB Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is "likely to result in a high risk" for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, wp248rev.0. 99 The EDPB reiterates that a DPIA is not required when the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing are very similar to the processing for which DPIA have been carried out. In such cases, results of DPIA for similar processing can be used, see Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, WP 248 rev.01, p. 12. 100 Idem, page 8. --- PAGE 31 --- Adopted be the one with a higher degree of control and knowledge of the targeting process in particular on the back-end of the deployed system, or on the means of the processing. Every DPIA must include measures envisaged to address the risks, including safeguards, security measures and mechanisms to ensure the protection of personal data, and to demonstrate compliance with the GDPR taking into account the rights and legitimate interests of data subjects and other persons concerned. If the identified risks cannot be sufficiently addressed (i.e. the residual risks remain high), the joint controllers are each responsible for ensuring a prior consultation with the relevant supervisory authorities. If the targeting would infringe the GDPR, in particular because the risks have insufficiently been identified or mitigated, the targeting should not take place. Example 9: The political party “Letschangetheworld” wishes to encourage social media users to vote for a particular political candidate in the upcoming elections. They wish to target elderly people living in rural areas of the country, who regularly go to church, and who have not travelled abroad in the past 2 years. There is joint controllership between the social media platform and the political party, for the matching of the profile and the display of the targeted advertisement. The assessment of whether a DPIA is required needs to be carried out both by the Letschangetheworld political party and the social media platform. Indeed, in this example, they both have sufficient knowledge on the criteria that are being used to target the individuals in order to see that the processing is likely to result in a high risk. If a DPIA is necessary, the joint arrangement should address the question of how the controllers should carry it and ensure that a relevant exchange of knowledge takes place. In this example, it may be that the social media platform is better placed to assess certain processing operations, insofar as the political party merely selects general targeting criteria. SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF DATA 8.1 What constitutes a special category of data The GDPR provides specific protection for personal data that are particularly sensitive in relation to individuals’ fundamental rights and freedoms. Such data are defined in Article 9 GDPR as special categories of personal data and include data about an individual’s health, racial or ethnic origin, biometry, religious or philosophical belief, political opinion, trade union membership, sex life or sexual orientation. Controllers may only process special categories of data if they can meet one of the conditions set out in Article 9(2) GDPR, such as having obtained the data subject’s explicit consent or the data have been manifestly made public by the data subject. In addition to the conditions in Article 9 GDPR, processing of special categories of data must rely on a legal basis laid down in Article 6 GDPR and be carried out in accordance with the fundamental principles set out in Article 5 GDPR. Furthermore, the processing of special categories of personal data is relevant when assessing appropriate measures according to Articles 24, 25, 28 and 32 GDPR, but also to determine whether a DPIA must be carried out according to Article 35 GDPR, and whether a data protection officer must be appointed under Article 37 GDPR. --- PAGE 32 --- Adopted In the context of social media and targeting, it is necessary to determine whether the processing of personal data involves “special categories of data” and if such data are processed by the social media provider, the targeter or both. If special categories of personal data are processed, it must be determined whether and under what conditions the social media provider and the targeter can lawfully process such data. If the social media provider processes the special category of data for targeting purposes, it must find a legal basis for the processing in Article 6 GDPR and rely on an exemption in Article 9(2) GDPR, such as explicit consent according to Article 9(2)(a) GDPR. If a targeter engages a social media provider and requests that the social media provider targets users based on this special category of data, the targeter will be jointly responsible with the social media provider for the processing of the special category data. The following legal analysis will explore different situations when such processing may take place and their legal implications. 8.1.1 Explicit special categories of data At times, personal data being processed clearly falls within the definition of special categories of data, e.g. in case of a direct statement about a person being member of a certain political party or religious association. Example 10: Ms. Flora states explicitly in her social media profile that she is a member of the GreenestPlanet political Party. The environmental organisation “Long live the Earth” wants to target social media users that are members of the GreenestPlanet political party in order to address targeted messages to them. In Example 10, the social media provider and the environmental organisation are acting as joint controllers.101 Insofar as the environmental organisation requests the social media provider to target users based on their political opinion, both controllers contribute to the processing of special categories of data as defined by Article 9 GDPR. Processing of these data are in principle prohibited according to Article 9(1). Both the social media provider and the environmental organisation must therefore be able to rely on one of the exemptions in Article 9(2) for their processing. In addition to that, they must also both have a legal basis according to Article 6. Out of the exemptions in Article 9(2), it appears that the only applicable exemptions in this situation would be to obtain the data subject’s explicit consent, under Article 9(2)(a) GDPR, or the exemption that Ms. Flora manifestly made the personal data public, under Article 9 (2)(e) GDPR. 8.1.2 Inferred and combined special categories of data Assumptions or inferences regarding special category data, for instance that a person is likely to vote for a certain party after visiting a page preaching liberal opinions, would also constitute a special category of personal data. Likewise, as previously stated by the EDPB, “profiling can create special category of data by inference from data which is not special category of data in its own right, but becomes so when combined with other data. For example, it may be possible to infer someone’s state of health from the records of their food shopping combined with data on the quality and energy content of foods”. 102 101 See the analysis in chapter 5.2.1. 102 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on Automated individual decision-making and Profiling for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, WP251rev.01, page 15. --- PAGE 33 --- Adopted For instance, the processing of a mere statement, or a single piece of location