requirements of the GDPR and protect the rights of data subjects against unlawful forms of processing. In Example 3, which involved list-based targeting, the situation is slightly different than Example 1. In Example 3, the bank initially collected the personal data and shared it with the social media provider for targeting purposes. In that case, the targeter has voluntarily caused the collection and transmission stage of the data processing. Each of these elements should be taken into account when assessing the level of responsibility of each actor and should be duly reflected in the terms of the joint arrangement. Similarly, in Example 4, in case of pixel-based targeting, it should be taken into account that the website operator enables the transmission of personal data to the social media provider. It is indeed the website “BestBags.com” that integrates a tracking pixel on its website so that it can target Mr Schmidt, although he has decided not to make a purchase108. The website is therefore actively involved in the collection and transmission of the data. As a joint controller, however, the social media provider is also under an obligation to undertake appropriate measures to meet the requirements of the GDPR and protect the rights of data subjects against unlawful forms of processing. In this case, if the data subject’s consent is sought, the joint controllers should agree upon the way in which consent is collected in practice. When it comes to assessing the level of responsibility of social media provider, the EDPB observes that several targeting mechanisms rely on profiling and/or other processing activities previously undertaken by the social media provider. It is the social media provider who decides to process personal data of its users in such a manner to develop the targeting criteria which it makes available to targeters. In order to do so, the social media provider has independently made certain decisions regarding the processing, such as which categories of data shall be processed, which targeting criteria shall be offered and who shall have access (to what types of) personal data that is processed in the context of a particular targeting campaign. Such processing activities must also comply with the GDPR, prior to the offering of any targeting services. The examples mentioned in the preceding paragraphs indicate the importance of clearly allocating responsibilities in the joint controller arrangement between social media providers and targeters. Even though the terms of the arrangement should in any case mirror the level of responsibility of each actor, a comprehensive arrangement which duly reflects the role and capabilities of each party is necessary not only to comply with Article 26 of the GDPR, but also for complying with other rules and principles of the GDPR. Finally, the EDPB notes that insofar as the terms of the joint arrangement between the social media provider and the targeter do not bind supervisory authorities, supervisory authorities may exercise 108 In addition, as BestBags.com has integrated the social media tracking pixel on its website, it is also responsible for complying with the ePrivacy Directive requirements regarding this tool, which, given that the pixel also facilitates the processing of personal data, is also of importance when determining the level of responsibility. --- PAGE 40 --- Adopted their competences and powers in relation to either joint controller, as long as the joint controller in question is subject to the competence of that supervisory authority.