2018, p. 14. 17 See also European Commission, Commission Guidance on the application of Union data protection law in the electoral context, A contribution from the European Commission to the Leaders’ meeting in Salzburg on 19-20 September 2018. See also L.M. Neudert and N.M. Marchal, Polarisation and the use of technology in political campaigns and communication, European Parliamentary Research Service, 2019, p. 22-24. 18 See also European Parliament resolution of 3 May 2018 on media pluralism and media freedom in the European Union. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted political and ideological polarisation.19 On the other hand, targeting mechanisms may also create risks of “information overload”, whereby individuals cannot make an informed decision because they have too much information and cannot tell if it is reliable. The collection of personal data by social media providers may not be limited to the activities performed by individuals on the social media platform itself. The targeting of social media users on the basis of information concerning their browsing behaviour or other activities outside the social media platform can give individuals the feeling that their behaviour is systematically being monitored. This may have a chilling effect on freedom of expression, including access to information.20 Such effects may be exacerbated if targeting is also based on the analysis of content shared by social media users. If private messages, posts and comments are subject to analysis for commercial or political use, this may also give rise to self-censorship. The potential adverse impact of targeting may be considerably greater where vulnerable categories of individuals are concerned, such as children. Targeting can influence the shaping of children’s personal preferences and interests, ultimately affecting their autonomy and their right to development. Recital 38 of the GDPR indicates that specific protection should apply to the use of personal data of children for the purposes of marketing or creating personality or user profiles and the collection of personal data with regard to children when using services offered directly to a child.21 The use of social media in the EU is widespread as 54% of people aged 16-74 participated in social networks in 2019. Besides, this participation rate has steadily increased over the years.22 The EDPB recognizes that the increase in concentration in the markets of social media and targeting may also increase risks to the rights and freedoms of a substantial number of individuals. For example, certain social media providers may be able to combine, either alone or in connection with other companies, a higher quantity and diversity of personal data. This ability, in turn, may increase the ability to offer more advanced targeting campaigns. This aspect is relevant from both a data protection (more in- depth profiling of the persons concerned) and competition law viewpoint (the unrivalled insight capabilities provided by the platform may make it an 'unavoidable trading partner' for online marketers). The degree of market and informational power, in turn, as the EDPB has recognised, “has the potential to threaten the level of data protection and freedom enjoyed by consumers of digital services”.23 The likelihood and severity of the aforementioned risks will depend, inter alia, on the nature of the targeting mechanism and how and for which exact purpose(s) it is used. Elements which may affect the likelihood and severity of risks in the context of the targeting of social media users will be discussed in greater detail in section 7. ACTORS AND ROLES 4.1 Users 19 European Data Protection Supervisor, Opinion 3/2018, p. 7. 20 European Data Protection Supervisor, Opinion 3/2018, p. 9 and Committee of experts on media pluralism and transparency of media ownership (MSI-MED), Internet and Electoral Campaigns, Study on the use of internet in electoral campaigns, Council of Europe study DGI(2017)11, April 2018, p. 19-21. 21 See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on Automated individual decision-making and Profiling for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, 6 February 2018, WP251rev.01, p. 29. 22 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/en/web/products-eurostat-news/-/edn-20200630-2. 23 Statement of the EDPB on the data protection impacts of economic concentration, available at: https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_statement_economic_concentration_en.pdf --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted Individuals make use of social media in different capacities and for different purposes (e.g. to stay in touch with friends, to exchange information about shared interests, or to seek out employment opportunities). The term “user” is typically used to refer to individuals who are registered with the service (i.e. those who have an “account” or “profile”). Many social media services can, however, also be accessed by individuals without having registered (i.e. without creating an account or profile).24 Such individuals are typically not able to make use of all of the same features or services offered to individuals who have registered with the social media provider. Both individuals that are and that are not registered with the social media providers may be considered “data subjects” within the meaning of Article 4(1) GDPR insofar as the individual is directly or indirectly identified or identifiable.25 Whether or not individuals are expected to register with a real name or use a nickname or pseudonym may vary according to the social media service in question. It will generally still be possible, however, to target (or otherwise single out) the user in question even in the absence of a real name policy, as most types of targeting do not rely on user names but other types of personal data such as interests, sociographic data, behaviour or other identifiers. Social media providers often encourage their users to reveal “real world” data, such as telephone numbers.26 Finally, it is worth noting that social media providers may also enable targeting of individuals who do not have an account with the social media provider.27 4.2 Social media providers Social media providers offer an online service that enables the development of networks and communities of users, among which information and content is shared. Social media services are typically offered through web browsers or dedicated apps, often after having requested the user to provide a set of personal data to constitute the user’s “account” or “profile”. They also often offer users associated account “controls” to enable them to access and control the personal data processed in the context of the use of their account. The social media provider determines the functionalities of the service. This in turn involves a determination of which data are processed, for which purpose, under which terms, as well as how personal data shall be processed. This allows for the provision of the social media service but also likely the provision of services, such as targeting, that can benefit business partners operating on the social media platform or in conjunction with it. The social media provider has the opportunity to gather large amounts of personal data relating to users’ and individuals’ that are not registered with social media providers behaviour and interactions, which enables it to obtain considerable insights into the users’ socio-demographic characteristics, interests and preferences. It is important to note that the ‘insights’ based on user activity often involve inferred or derived personal data. For example, where a user interacts with certain content (e.g. by “liking” a post on social media, or watching video content), this action can be recorded by the social 24 The personal data and profiling information maintained by social media providers in relation to individuals that are not registered with social media providers are sometimes referred to as “shadow profiles”. 25 See also recital (26) (“singling out”). See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 4/2007 on the concept of personal data, 20 June 2007, WP 136, p. 12 and following. 26 In some cases, social media providers ask for additional documentation to further verify the data provided, for example by requesting users to upload their ID cards or similar documentation. 27 Such targeting may be rendered possible on the basis of online identifiers provided by their devices, applications, tools and protocols, such as internet protocol addresses, cookie identifiers or other identifiers. This may leave traces which, in particular when combined with unique identifiers and other information received by the servers, may be used to create profiles of the natural persons and identify them. See also recital (30) GDPR. Based on this recognition, targeted ads may be displayed on a website the individual visits. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted media provider, and an inference might be made that the user in question enjoyed the content he or she interacted with. Social media providers increasingly gather data not only from activities on the platform itself, but also from activities undertaken ‘off-platform’, combining data from multiple sources, online and offline, in order to generate further insights. The data can be combined with personal data that individuals actively disclose to the social media provider (e.g. a username, e-mail address, location, and phone number), alongside data which is “assigned” to them by the platform (such as unique identifiers). 4.3 Targeters These guidelines use the term “targeter” to designate natural or legal persons that use social media services in order to direct specific messages at a set of social media users on the basis of