under Article 6 GDPR is also likely to be the consent of the data subject. Indeed, when assessing compliance with Article 6 GDPR, one should take into account that the processing as a whole involves specific activities for which the EU legislature has sought to provide additional protection. 82 Moreover, controllers must take into account the impact on data subjects’ rights when identifying the appropriate legal basis in order to respect the principle of fairness.83 5.4 Targeting on the basis of inferred data Inferred data refers to data which is created by the controller on the basis of the data provided by the data subject (regardless of whether these data were observed or actively provided by the data subject, or a combination thereof).84 Inferences about data subjects can be made both by the social media provider and the targeter. For example, by virtue of monitoring the behaviour of its users over a long period of time, both on and off the social media (e.g. pages visited, time spent on each page, number of reconnections to that page, words searched, hyperlinks followed, “likes” given), the social media provider may be able to infer information regarding the interests and other characteristics of the user of the social media. In the same vein, a targeter might also be able to infer data about specific individuals and use that knowledge when targeting him or her to display ads on his or her social media page. Example 7: Mrs Delucca often “likes” photos posted by the Art Gallery “Beautifulart” by impressionist painter Pataolito on its social media page. Museum Z is looking to attract individuals who are interested in impressionist paintings in light of its upcoming exhibition. Museum Z uses the following targeting criteria offered by the social media provider: “interested in impressionism”, gender, age and place of residence. Mrs Delucca subsequently receives targeted advertisement by Museum Z related to the upcoming exhibition of Museum Z on her social media page. Example 8: Mr Leon has indicated on his social media page that he is interested in sports. He has downloaded an application on his mobile phone to follow the latest results of his favorite sport games, has set on his browser the page www.livesportsresults.com as his homepage on his laptop, often uses his desktop computer at work to search for the latest sports results on the internet. He also visits a number of online gambling websites. The social media provider tracks Mr Leon’ online activity across 81 Article 29 Working Party, Opinion on profiling and automated decision making, WP 251, rev. 01, p. 15, see also Article 29 WP, Opinion on legitimate interest, p. 32 and 48: «Overall, there is an imbalance between the company’s legitimate interest and the protection of users’ fundamental rights and Article 7(f) should not be relied on as a legal ground for processing. Article 7(a) would be a more appropriate ground to be used, provided that the conditions for a valid consent are met». 82 Opinion 5/2019 on the interplay between the ePrivacy Directive and the GDPR, in particular regarding the competence, tasks and powers of data protection authorities, paragraph 41. 83 European Data Protection Board, Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, 8 October 2019, paragraph 1. 84 See also Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Guidelines on the right to data portability, WP 242 rev.01, 5 April 2017, p. 10. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted his multiple devices, i.e. his laptop, his cell mobile phone, and his desktop computer. Based on this activity and all the information provided by Mr Leon, the social media provider infers that he will be interested in online betting. In addition, the social media platform has developed targeting criteria enabling companies to target people who are likely to be impulsive and have a lower income. The online betting company “bestpaydayloans” wishes to target users that are interested in betting and that are likely to be betting heavily. It therefore selects the criteria offered by the social media provider to target the audience to whom its advertisement should be displayed. 5.4.1 Roles For what concerns the determination of the roles of the different actors, the EDPB notes the following: in Example 7, joint controllership exists between Museum Z and the social media provider concerning the processing of personal data for the purposes of targeted advertising, taking into account the collection of these data via the ‘like’-functionality on the social media platform, and the ‘analysis’ undertaken by the social media provider in order to offer the targeting criterion (“interested in impressionism”) to the targeter fitting the purpose of finally displaying the advertisement.85 In Example 8, joint control exists between “bestpaydayloans” and the social media provider in relation to the processing operations jointly determined, in this case the selection of targeting criteria and subsequent display of the advertisement, as well as any reporting relating to the targeting campaign. 5.4.2 Legal basis Targeting of social media users on the basis of inferred data for advertising purposes typically involves profiling.86 The WP29 has previously clarified that according to the GDPR, profiling is an automated processing of personal data which aims at evaluating personal aspects, in particular to analyse or make predictions about individuals, adding that “[t]he use of the word ‘evaluating’ suggests that profiling involves some form of assessment or judgement about a person”.87 Profiling may be lawful by reference to any of the legal grounds in Article 6(1) GDPR, subject to the validity of this legal basis. In Example 7, Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive is applicable, insofar as the display of the advertisement on Mrs. Delucca’s page related to the painter Pataolito requires a read/write operation to match this “like” with information previously held on her by the social media provider. Consent will therefore be required for these operations. For what concerns Example 8, the EDPB recalls that in the case of automated decision-making which produces legal effects or similarly significantly affects the data subject, as set out in Article 22 GDPR data controllers may rely on the following exceptions:  explicit consent of a data subject;  the necessity of the automated decision-making for entering into, or performance of, a contract; or  authorisation by Union or Member State law to which the controller is subject. 85 As regards social media pages, joint controllership conditions may also be met in relation to statistical information provided by the social media provider to the page administrator: see CJEU C-210/16, Wirtschaftsakademie. 86 The EDPB notes that profiling may have occurred in previous examples as well. 87 Guidelines on Automated individual decision-making and Profiling for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679, WP251rev.01, p. 7. --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted WP29 has already stated that “In many typical cases the decision to present targeted advertising based on profiling will not have a similarly significant effect on individuals (...). However, it is possible that it may do, depending upon the particular characteristics of the case, including:  the intrusiveness of the profiling process, including the tracking of individuals across different websites, devices and services;  the expectations and wishes of the individuals concerned;  the way the advert is delivered; or  using knowledge of the vulnerabilities of the data subjects targeted.”88 Where the profiling undertaken by the social media provider is likely to have a “similarly significant [effect]” on a data subject, Article 22 shall be applicable. An assessment as to whether targeting will “similarly significantly [effect]” a data subject will need to be conducted by the controller (or joint controllers, as the case may be) in each instance with reference to the specific facts of the targeting. In such circumstances as described in Example 8, the display of online betting advertisements may fall under the scope of Article 22 GDPR (targeting financially vulnerable persons that are interested in online betting which have the potential to significantly and adversely affect his financial situation). Therefore, in accordance with Article 22, explicit consent would be required. Furthermore, the use of tracking techniques triggers the applicability of Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive, resulting in a requirement of prior consent. Finally, the EDPB recalls that for the processing to be lawful, the controller must conduct a case-by-case assessment, and that obtaining consent does not reduce other obligations to observe the requirements of fairness, necessity, proportionality and data quality, as stated in Article 5 GDPR. TRANSPARENCY AND RIGHT OF ACCESS Article 5(1)(a) GDPR states that personal data shall be processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject. Article 5(1)(b) GDPR also states that personal data shall be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes. Articles 12, 13 and 14 GDPR contain specific provisions on the transparency obligations of the data controller. Finally, recital 39 states that “it should be transparent to natural persons that personal data concerning them are collected, used, consulted or otherwise processed and to what