The EDPB would like to recall that the analysis on the roles and responsibilities needs to be done on a case by case basis, and that the conclusion on this specific example is without prejudice of any further work that can be carried out by the EDPB on APIs. The situation would of course be different if the social media provider, in addition to making the personal data available, also participated in the determination of purpose pursued by YourPerfectJob. In any event, joint controllership still exists between the targeter and the social media provider as regards the use of list-based targeting. --- PAGE 35 --- Adopted Article 9(2)(e) of the GDPR allows processing of special category of data in cases where the data have been manifestly made public by the data subject. The word “manifestly” implies that there must be a high threshold for relying on this exemption. The EDPB notes that the presence of a single element may not always be sufficient to establish that the data have been “manifestly” made public by the data subject. In practice, a combination of the following or other elements may need to be considered for controllers to demonstrate that the data subject has clearly manifested the intention to make the data public, and a case-by-case assessment is needed. The following elements may be relevant to help inform this assessment: (i) the default settings of the social media platform (i.e. whether the data subject took a specific action to change these default private settings into public ones); or (ii) the nature of the social media platform (i.e. whether this platform is intrinsically linked with the idea of connecting with close acquaintances of the data subject or creating intimate relations (such as online dating platforms), or if it is meant to provide a wider scope of interpersonal relations, such as professional relations, or microblogging, media sharing, social platforms to share online reviews, etc. ; or (iii) the accessibility of the page where the sensitive data is published (i.e. whether the information is publicly accessible or if, for instance, the creation of an account is necessary before accessing the information); or (iv) the visibility of the information where the data subject is informed of the public nature of the information that they publish (i.e. whether there is for example a continuous banner on the page, or whether the button for publishing informs the data subject that the information will be made public...); or (v) if the data subject has published the sensitive data himself/herself, or whether instead the data has been published by a third party (e.g. a photo published by a friend which reveals sensitive data) or inferred. The EDPB notes that the presence of a single element may not always be sufficient to establish that the data have been “manifestly” made public by the data subject. In practice, a combination of these or other elements may need to be considered for controllers to demonstrate that the data subject has clearly manifested the intention to make the data public. Example 15: Mr Jansen has opened an account on a microblogging social media platform. While completing his profile, he indicated that he is homosexual. Being a conservative, he chose to join conservative groups, knowing that he has been informed while subscribing that the messages he exchanges on the platform are public. A conservative political party wishes to target people who share the same political affiliations and sexual orientation as Mr. Jansen using the social media targeting tools. Because members’ sexual orientation is by default “private” and that Mr. Jansen has not taken any step to make it public, it cannot be considered as having been manifestly made public. In addition, the data relating to his political affiliation has not been made manifestly public, despite of (i) the nature of the microblogging social media platform, which is meant to share information with the wide public, and (ii) the fact that he has been informed of the public nature of the messages he publishes on the forums. In addition, although he has joined public forums relating to conservatism, he cannot be targeted on the basis of this sensitive data, because it is the social media platform that makes a deduction on Mr Janssen’s political affiliation, and it was not the specific intention of the data subject to make this data manifestly public, all the more that this deduction may turn out to be false. He cannot --- PAGE 36 --- Adopted therefore be targeted on the basis of political affiliation data. In other words, the circumstances in each specific case have to be taken into account when assessing whether the data have manifestly been made public by the data subject.104 JOINT CONTROLLERSHIP AND RESPONSIBILITY 9.1 Joint controller arrangement and determination of responsibilities (Art. 26 GDPR) Article 26 (1) GDPR requires joint controllers to determine – in a transparent manner – their respective responsibilities for compliance with the obligations of the GDPR in an arrangement, including, as explained above, the requirements for transparency. In terms of scope, the EDPB considers that the arrangement between targeters and social media providers should encompass all processing operations for which they are jointly responsible (i.e. which are under their joint control). By concluding an arrangement that is only superficial and incomplete, targeters and social media providers would be in breach of non-compliance with their obligations under Article 26 of the GDPR. For instance, in Example 4 the arrangement should cover the entire processing of personal data where there is joint controllership, i.e. from the collection of personal data in the context of the visit by Mr. Schmidt of the website “BestBags.com” with a tracking pixel, to the display of the advertisement on his social media page, as well as any eventual reporting relating to the targeting campaign. In order to develop a comprehensive arrangement, both the social media provider and the targeter must be aware of and have sufficiently detailed information regarding the specific data processing operations taking place. The arrangement between the targeter and the social media provider should therefore contain (or refer to) all necessary information to enable both parties to comply with their obligations under the GDPR, including their duty to comply with the principles under Article 5(1) GDPR and their duty to demonstrate their compliance according to Article 5(2) GDPR. If, for example, the controller is considering to rely on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR as a legal basis, it is necessary, among other things, to know the extent of the data processing in order to be able to assess whether the interest of the controller(s) are overridden by the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subjects. Without sufficient information concerning the processing, such an assessment cannot be performed. The importance of including or referencing the necessary information in the context of a joint arrangement cannot be overstated, especially in situations where one of the parties almost exclusive has the knowledge and access to the information necessary for both parties to comply with the GDPR. For instance, in Example 1, when Company X is assessing whether it can rely on the legitimate interest as a legal basis to target men between the age of 30 and 45 and who have indicated that they are single, it is necessary that it has access to sufficient information concerning the processing carried out by the social media platform, including for instance for what concerns the additional 104 The WP29 clarified in its Opinion on some key issues of the Law Enforcement Directive (WP 258, 29/11/2017, p. 10) that the expression “manifestly made public by the data subject” has to be interpreted to imply that the data subject was aware that the respective data will be publicly available which means to everyone, including authorities; therefore, “In case of doubt, a narrow interpretation should be applied...”. --- PAGE 37 --- Adopted measures (such as the right to prior objection) put into place by the latter, to ensure that legitimate interests are not overridden by the data subject’s interests or fundamental rights and freedoms. In order to ensure that the rights of the data subject can be accommodated effectively, the EDPB takes the view that the purpose of the processing and the corresponding legal basis should be also reflected in the joint arrangement between targeters and social media providers who are joint controllers. Although the GDPR does not preclude joint controllers to use different legal basis for different processing operations they carry out, it is recommended to use, whenever possible, the same legal basis for a particular targeting tool and for a particular purpose. Indeed, if each stage of the processing is processed on a different legal basis, this would render the exercise of rights impracticable for the data subject (e.g. for one stage there would be a right to data portability, for another there would be a right to object). As controllers the targeter and the social media provider are both responsible for ensuring that the principle of purpose limitation is complied