means. The reason why the bank acts as sole controller when collecting the e-mail addresses from Ms. Jones and Mr. Lopez respectively, is because the collection of data occurs prior to (and is not inextricably linked to) the targeting campaign. Therefore, in this case one must distinguish between the initial set of processing operations for which only the bank is a controller and a subsequent processing for which joint control exists. The responsibility of the bank does not extend to operations occurring after the targeting and reporting has been completed and in which the targeter has not participated in the purposes and means and for which the social media provider acts as the sole controller. B. Legal basis In Example 2, Article 6(1)f GDPR does not provide an appropriate legal basis to justify the processing in this case, taking into account the context in which the personal data was provided. Indeed, Ms. Jones contacted the bank for the sole purpose of setting up an appointment, following which she communicated her intention not to make use of the services offered by the bank. Hence, one can consider that there is no reasonable expectation by Ms. Jones that her personal data shall be used for targeting purposes (‘re-targeting’). Moreover, a compatibility test under Article 6(4) GDPR would likely lead to the outcome that this processing is not compatible with the purpose for which the personal data are initially collected. In Example 3, the targeter might be able to rely on legitimate interest to justify the processing, taking into account inter alia that Mr. Lopez was: (a) informed of the fact that his e-mail address may be used for purposes of advertising via social media for services linked to the one used by the data subject; (b) the advertisement relates to services similar to those for Mr. Lopez is already a customer, and (c) Mr. Lopez was given the ability to object prior to the processing, at the moment where the personal data were collected by the bank. However, the EDPB would like to clarify that the fulfillment of information duties as per Articles 13 and 14 GDPR and the weighing of interests to be performed according to Article 6 (1)(f) GDPR are two different sets of obligations. Therefore, the mere fulfilment of information duties according to Articles 13 and 14 GDPR is not a transparency measure to be taken into consideration for the weighing of interests according to Article 6 (1)(f) of GDPR. 5.3 Targeting on the basis of observed data categories of persons whose personal data is to be made use of. The social media provider likewise makes a determination as to whose personal data shall be processed, by allowing which categories of data shall be processed, which targeting criteria shall be offered and who shall have access (to what types of) personal data that is processed in the context of a particular targeting campaign. The shared purpose underlying these processing operations resembles the purpose identified in Example 1, namely the display a specific advertisement to a set of individuals (in this case: social media users) who make up the target audience. --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted There are several ways in which social media providers may be able to observe the behaviour of their users. For example, observation is possible through the social media service itself or may also be possible on external websites by virtue of social plug-ins or pixels. Example 4: Pixel-based targeting Mr Schmidt is browsing online in order to purchase a backpack. He visits the website “BestBags.com”, views a number of items, but decides not to make a purchase. The operator of “BestBags.com” wishes to target social media users who have visited their website without making a purchase. To this end, it integrates a so-called “tracking pixel”69 on its website, which is made available by the social media provider. After leaving the website of BestBags.com and logging into his social media account, Mr Schmidt begins to see advertisement for the backpacks he was considering when browsing BestBags.com. Example 5: Geo-targeting Mrs Michu has installed the application of a social media provider on her smartphone. She is walking around Paris during her holidays. The social media provider collects information regarding Mrs Michu’s whereabouts via the GPS functionalities of her smartphone on an ongoing basis 70 , using the permissions that have been granted to the social media provider when the application was installed. Mrs Michu is staying at a hotel that is located next to a pizzeria. The pizzeria uses the geo-targeting functionality offered by the social media provider to target individuals who are within 1km of its premises for the first time in the last 6 months. When opening the social media provider’s application on her smartphone, Mrs Michu sees an advertisement from the pizzeria, decides that she is hungry and buys a pizza via its website. Example 6: Mrs Ghorbani creates an account on a social media platform. During the process of registration she is asked if she consents to the processing of her personal data to see targeted advertisement on her social media page, on the basis of data she directly provides to the social media provider (such as her age, sex and location), as well as on the basis of her activity on other websites outside of the social media platform using cookies. She is informed that this data will be collected via social media plug-ins or tracking pixels, the processes are clearly described to her, as well as the fact that targeting involves other entities who are jointly responsible for ensuring compliance with the GDPR. It is also explained to her that she can withdraw her consent at any time, and she is provided with a link to the privacy policy. Because Mrs Ghorbani is interested in seeing targeted advertisement on her social media page, she gives her consent. No advertising cookies are placed or collected until Mrs Ghorbani expresses here consent. Later on, she visits the website “Thelatesthotnews.com” that has a social media button integrated on it. A small but clearly visible banner appears on the right edge of the screen, asking Mrs Ghorbani to 69 Tracking pixels are comprised of small snippets of code that are integrated into the website of the targeter. When an individual accesses the targeter’s website in their browser, the browser automatically sends a request to the social media provider’s server to obtain the tracking pixel. Once the tracking pixel is downloaded, the social media provider is typically able to monitor the user’s session (i.e. the individual’s behaviour on the website(s) in question). The observed data can be used in order for example to add a social media user to a particular target audience. 70 A social media provider may also be able to determine the whereabouts of their users on the basis of other data points, including IP address and WiFi information from mobile devices, or the user-derived data (e.g. if they place information about their location on the platform in a post). --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted consent to the transmission of her personal data to the social media provider using cookies and social media plug-ins. The website operator undertook technical measures so that no personal data is transferred to the social media platform until she gives her consent. 5.3.1 Roles In Example 4, both the targeter and the social media provider participate in determining the purposes and means of the processing of personal data, which results in the display of the advertisement to Mr. Schmidt. As far as the determination of purpose is concerned, Bestbags.com and the social media provider jointly determine the purpose of the processing, which is to display a specific advertisement on the social media platform to the individuals who make up the target audience. By embedding the pixel into its website, Bestbags.com exerts a decisive influence over the means of the processing. The collection and transmission of the personal data of visitors of the website to the social media provider would not have occurred without the embedding of that pixel. The social media provider, on the other hand, has developed and offers the software code (pixel) that leads to the automatic collection, transmission and evaluation for marketing purposes of personal data to the social media provider. As a result, joint controllership exists in relation to the collection of personal data and its transmission by way of pixels, as well as in relation to the matching and subsequent display of the advertisement to Mr Schmidt on the social platform, and for any reporting relating to the targeting campaign. Joint controllership also exists, for similar reasons, in Example 6. In Example 5, the pizzeria exercises a decisive influence over the processing of personal data by defining the parameters of the ad targeting in accordance with its business needs (for instance, opening hours of the pizzeria and geo-location of persons close to the pizzeria in this time-slot), and therefore must be regarded as taking part in the determination of the purposes and