and protocols, such as internet protocol addresses, cookie identifiers or other identifiers. This may leave traces which, in particular when combined with unique identifiers and other information received by the servers, may be used to create profiles of the natural persons and identify them. See also recital (30) GDPR. Based on this recognition, targeted ads may be displayed on a website the individual visits. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted media provider, and an inference might be made that the user in question enjoyed the content he or she interacted with. Social media providers increasingly gather data not only from activities on the platform itself, but also from activities undertaken ‘off-platform’, combining data from multiple sources, online and offline, in order to generate further insights. The data can be combined with personal data that individuals actively disclose to the social media provider (e.g. a username, e-mail address, location, and phone number), alongside data which is “assigned” to them by the platform (such as unique identifiers). 4.3 Targeters These guidelines use the term “targeter” to designate natural or legal persons that use social media services in order to direct specific messages at a set of social media users on the basis of specific parameters or criteria.28 What sets targeters apart from other users of social media is that they select their messages and/or their intended audience according to the perceived characteristics, interests or preferences of the individuals concerned, a practice which is sometimes also referred to as “micro- targeting”.29 Targeters can engage in targeting to advance commercial, political, or other interests. Typical examples include brands who use social media to advertise their products including to increase brand awareness. Political parties also increasingly make use of social media as part of their campaigning strategy. Charities and other non-profit organisations also use social media to target messages at potential contributors or to develop communities. It is important to note that social media users can be targeted in different ways. For example, targeting might occur not only through displaying personalized advertisement (e.g. through a “banner” shown on the top or side of a webpage), but - as far as it is happening within the social media platform - also through display in a user’s “feed”, ”timeline“ or “story”, where the advertising content appears alongside user-generated content. Targeting may also involve the creation of content hosted by the social media provider (e.g. via a dedicated “page” or other social media presence) or elsewhere (i.e. on third-party websites). Targeters may have their own websites and apps, where they can integrate specific social media business tools or features such as social plugins or logins or by using the application programming interfaces (APIs) or software development kits (SDKs) offered by social media providers. 4.4 Other relevant actors Targeters may directly use targeting mechanisms offered by social media providers or enlist the services of other actors, such as marketing service providers, ad networks, ad exchanges, demand-side and supply-side platforms, data management providers (DMPs) and data analytics companies. These actors are part of the complex and evolving online advertising ecosystem (which is sometimes known as “adtech”) that collects and processes data relating to individuals (including social media users) by, for example, tracking their activities across websites and apps.30 Data brokers and data management providers are also relevant actors playing an important role in the targeting of social media users. Data brokers and DMPs differentiate themselves from other adtech 28Processing of personal data by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity does not fall under the material scope of the GDPR (Art. 2(2)(c)). 29 Simply sharing information on a social media page which is intended for the public at large (e.g. information about opening hours) without prior selection of the intended audience would not be considered as «targeting» for the purposes of these guidelines. 30 On the description of the different actors, see WP29, Opinion 2/2010 on behavioural advertisement, at page 5. The Opinion is available at: https://ec.europa.eu/justice/Article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2010/wp171_en.pdf --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted companies to the extent that they not only process data collected by means of tracking technologies, but also by means of data collected from other sources, that can include both online and offline sources. In other words, data brokers and DMPs aggregate data collected from a wide variety of sources, which they then might sell to other stakeholders involved in the targeting process.31 While each of the other actors mentioned above can play an important role in targeting of social media users, the focus of the current guidelines is on the distribution of roles and data protection obligations of social media providers and targeters. Analogous considerations may apply, however, to the other actors involved in the online advertising ecosystem, depending on the role of each actor in the targeting process. 4.5 Roles and responsibilities In order to clarify the respective roles and responsibilities of social media providers and targeters, it is important to take account of the relevant case law of the CJEU. The judgments in Wirtschaftsakademie (C-210/16), Jehovah’s Witnesses (C-25/17) and Fashion ID (C-40/17) are particularly relevant here. The starting point of the analysis is the legal definition of controller. According to Article 4(7) GDPR, a “‘controller” means “the natural or legal person [...] which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data”. In Wirtschaftsakademie, the CJEU decided that the administrator of a so-called “fan page” on Facebook must be regarded as taking part in the determination of the purposes and means of the processing of personal data. According to the submissions made to the CJEU, the creation of a fan page involves the definition of parameters by the administrator, which has an influence on the processing of personal data for the purpose of producing statistics based on visits to the fan page.32 Using the filters provided by Facebook, the administrator can define the criteria in accordance with which the statistics are to be drawn up, and even designate the categories of persons whose personal data is to be made use of by Facebook: “In particular, the administrator of the fan page can ask for — and thereby request the processing of — demographic data relating to its target audience, including trends in terms of age, sex, relationship and occupation, information on the lifestyles and centers of interest of the target audience and information on the purchases and online purchasing habits of visitors to its page, the categories of goods and services that appeal the most, and geographical data which tell the fan page administrator where to make special offers and where to organise events, and more generally enable it to target best the information it offers.” As the definition of parameters depends inter alia on the administrator’s target audience “and the objectives of managing and promoting its activities”, the administrator also participates in determining the purposes of the processing of personal data.33 The administrator was therefore categorised as a controller jointly responsible for the processing of personal data of the visitors of its ‘page’, together with the social media provider. As further developed in section 9 of the present guidelines, controllers may be involved at different stages of the processing of personal data and to different degrees. In such circumstances, the level of responsibility of each of them must be assessed with regard to all the relevant circumstances of the particular case: 31 See Consumer Policy Research Centre, “A day in the life of data”, available at: http://cprc.org.au/publication/research-report-a-day-in-the-life-of-data/ 32 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, paragraph 36. 33 Judgment in Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, paragraph 39. --- PAGE 12 --- Adopted “[T]he existence of joint responsibility does not necessarily imply equal responsibility of the various operators involved in the processing of personal data. On the contrary, those operators may be involved at different stages of that processing of personal data and to different degrees, so that the level of responsibility of each of them must be assessed with regard to all the relevant circumstances of the particular case.”34 While concluding that the administrator of a page acts as a controller, jointly with Facebook, the CJEU also noted that in the present case, Facebook must be regarded as primarily determining the purposes and means of processing the personal data of users of Facebook and persons visiting the fan pages hosted on Facebook.35 In Fashion ID, the CJEU decided that a website operator can be a considered a controller when it embeds a Facebook social plugin on its website that causes the browser of a visitor to transmit personal data of the visitor to Facebook.36 The qualification of the website operator as controller is, however, limited to the operation or set of operations in respect of which it actually determines the purposes and means. In this particular case, the CJEU considered that the website operator is only capable of determining, jointly with Facebook, the purposes and means of the collection and disclosure by transmission of the personal data of visitors to its website. As a result, the CJEU ruled