any direct interaction with the data subject, the targeter should at least ensure that the social media platform provide the data subject with means to efficiently express their right to prior objection. As joint controllers, the targeter and social media provider should clarify how the individuals’ right to object (as well as other rights) will be accommodated in the context of the joint arrangement (see section 6). If the balancing exercise points out that data subject’s interests or fundamental rights and freedoms override the legitimate interest of the social media provider and the targeter, the use of Article 6(1)(f) is not possible. For what concerns the consent lawful basis, the controller needs to keep in mind that there are clearly situations in which the processing would not be lawful without the valid consent of the individuals concerned (Article 6(1)(a) GDPR). For example, the WP29 has previously considered that it would be difficult for controllers to justify using legitimate interests as a legal basis for intrusive profiling and tracking practices for marketing or advertising purposes, for example those that involve tracking individuals across multiple websites, locations, devices, services or data-brokering.63 To be valid, the consent collected for the processing needs to fulfil the conditions laid out in Articles 4(11) and 7 GDPR. Generally speaking, consent can only be an appropriate legal basis if a data subject is offered control and genuine choice. If consent is bundled up as a non-negotiable part of terms and conditions, it is presumed not to have been freely given. Consent must also be specific, informed and unambiguous and the data subject must be able to refuse or withdraw consent without detriment.64 Consent (Article 6(1)(a) GDPR) could be envisaged, provided that all the requirements for valid consent are met. The EDPB recalls that obtaining consent also does not negate or in any way diminish the controller’s obligations to observe the principles of processing enshrined in the GDPR, especially Article 5 with regard to fairness, necessity and proportionality, as well as data quality. Even if the processing of personal data is based on consent of the data subject, this would not legitimize targeting which is disproportionate or unfair.65 Finally, the EDPB is of the opinion that the processing of personal data described in the Example 1 cannot be justified on the basis of Article 6(1)(b) by neither the social platform nor the targeter.66 Directive 95/46/EC, WP217, 9 April 2014 https://ec.europa.eu/justice/Article-29/documentation/opinion- recommendation/files/2014/wp217_en.pdf 63 Article 29 Working Party, Opinion on profiling and automated decision making, WP 251, rev. 01, p. 15, see also Article 29 WP, Opinion on legitimate interest, p. 32 and 48: « Overall, there is an imbalance between the company’s legitimate interest and the protection of users’ fundamental rights and Article 7(f) should not be relied on as a legal ground for processing. Article 7(a) would be a more appropriate ground to be used, provided that the conditions for a valid consent are met ». 64 See Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on consent under Regulation 2016/679, WP259 rev.01. 65 See Article 29 Working Party, Guidelines on consent under Regulation 2016/679, WP259 rev.01, p. 3-4. 66 See Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects, Version 2.0, October 2019, available at --- PAGE 19 --- Adopted 5.2.2 Data provided by the user of the social media platform to the targeter Targeting can also involve data provided by the data subject to the targeter, who then uses the data collected in order to target the data subject on social media. For example, “list-based” targeting occurs where a targeter uploads pre-existing lists of personal data (such as e-mail addresses or phone numbers) for the social media provider to match against the information on the platform. In this case, the social media provider compares the data uploaded by the targeter with user data that it already possesses, and any users that match are added to or excluded from the target audience (that is, the ‘cluster’ of persons to which the advertisement will be displayed on the social media platform). The social media provider may also allow the targeter to ‘check’ the list prior to finalising it, meaning that some processing takes place even before the audience has been created. Example 2: Ms. Jones contacts Bank X to set up an appointment regarding a possible mortgage because she is buying a house. She contacts the bank via e-mail to set up the appointment. Following the appointment, Ms. Jones decides not to become a customer of the bank. The bank has nevertheless added the e-mail address of Ms. Jones to its customer e-mail database. Then, the bank uses its e-mail database, by allowing the social media provider to ‘matching’ the list of e-mail addresses it holds with those held by the social media platform, in order to target the individuals concerned with the full range of financial services on the social media platform. Example 3: Mr. Lopez has been a customer at Bank X for almost a year. When he became a customer, he provided an e-mail address and was informed by Bank X, at the moment of collection, that: (a) his e-mail address would be used for advertising of offers linked to the bank services that he is already using; and (b) he may object to this processing at any time. The bank has added his e-mail address to its customer e- mail database. Afterwards, the bank uses its e-mail database to target its customers on the social media platform with the full range of financial services it has on offer.67 A. Roles In these examples, the targeter, i.e. the bank, acts as a controller because it determines the purposes and means of the processing by actively collecting, processing and transmitting the personal data of the individuals concerned to the social media provider for advertising purposes. The social media provider, in turn, acts as a controller because it has taken the decision to use personal data acquired from the social media user (i.e. the e-mail address provided when setting up his or her account) in order to enable the targeter to display advertising to an audience of specific individuals. Joint controllership exists in relation to the processing operations for which the social media provider and the targeter jointly determine the purposes and means, in this case, uploading unique identifiers related to the intended audience, matching, selection of targeting criteria and subsequent display of the advertisement, as well as any reporting relating to the targeting campaign.68 https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-b- adopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf 67 In situations where e-mail addresses are used to send direct marketing to users controllers must also take into account the provisions of Article 13 of the ePrivacy Directive. ”. 68 The determination of purposes and means of the processing of the targeter and social media provider is similar (albeit not identical) to Example 1. By uploading the list of email addresses and setting the additional targeting criteria, the targeter defines the criteria in accordance with which the targeting takes place and designates the --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted In both examples the bank acts as the sole controller regarding the initial collection of the email addresses of Ms. Jones and Mr. Lopez respectively. The social media provider does not participate in any way to determine the means and purposes of this collection. The joint control begins with the transmission of the personal data and the simultaneous collection of it by the social media provider. It continues throughout the display of the targeted advertisement ends (in most of the cases) when a subsequent reporting phase is completed. In some cases, joint controllership can be further extended, even until the deletion of the data phase insofar as the targeter still continues to participate in the determination of purposes and means. The reason why the bank acts as sole controller when collecting the e-mail addresses from Ms. Jones and Mr. Lopez respectively, is because the collection of data occurs prior to (and is not inextricably linked to) the targeting campaign. Therefore, in this case one must distinguish between the initial set of processing operations for which only the bank is a controller and a subsequent processing for which joint control exists. The responsibility of the bank does not extend to operations occurring after the targeting and reporting has been completed and in which the targeter has not participated in the purposes and means and for which the social media provider acts as the sole controller. B. Legal basis In Example 2, Article 6(1)f GDPR does not provide an appropriate legal basis to justify the processing in this case, taking into account the context in which the personal data was provided. Indeed, Ms. Jones contacted the bank for the sole purpose of setting up an appointment, following which she communicated her intention not to make use of the services offered by the bank. Hence, one can consider that there is no reasonable expectation by Ms. Jones that her personal data shall