interpretation should be applied...”. --- PAGE 37 --- Adopted measures (such as the right to prior objection) put into place by the latter, to ensure that legitimate interests are not overridden by the data subject’s interests or fundamental rights and freedoms. In order to ensure that the rights of the data subject can be accommodated effectively, the EDPB takes the view that the purpose of the processing and the corresponding legal basis should be also reflected in the joint arrangement between targeters and social media providers who are joint controllers. Although the GDPR does not preclude joint controllers to use different legal basis for different processing operations they carry out, it is recommended to use, whenever possible, the same legal basis for a particular targeting tool and for a particular purpose. Indeed, if each stage of the processing is processed on a different legal basis, this would render the exercise of rights impracticable for the data subject (e.g. for one stage there would be a right to data portability, for another there would be a right to object). As controllers the targeter and the social media provider are both responsible for ensuring that the principle of purpose limitation is complied with and should therefore incorporate appropriate provisions to that end within the joint arrangement. For example, if the targeter wishes to use personal data provided to it by the data subject in order to target on social media, it must take appropriate measures to ensure that the data provided shall not be further used by the social media provider in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes, unless the valid consent of the data subject has been obtained pursuant to Article 6(4) of the GDPR. In Example 3, the Bank X should ensure that there are appropriate provisions in the joint arrangement with the social media platform that Mr. Lopez’ email address is not used for other purposes that advertising of offers linked to the bank services that he is already using without Mr. Lopez’ consent. Likewise, the social media provider must ensure that use of data for targeting purposes by the targeters is in compliance with the principles of purpose limitation, transparency and lawfulness. Other obligations that should be considered by the targeter and social media provider in the context of their joint arrangement include: other general data protection principles contained in Article 5 GDPR, security of processing, data protection by design and by default, notifications and communications of personal data breaches, data protection impact assessments, the use of processors and transfers to third countries. For instance, in Example 13, the joint arrangement should address the question of which of the controllers should carry a DPIA and ensure that a relevant exchange of knowledge takes place. In other words, the political party “Letschangetheworld” should ensure that it has a sufficient level of information, for instance on the security measures put into place by the social media platform, when a DPIA is carried out. Finally, the joint arrangement between the social media provider and the targeter must contain specific information about how the obligations under the GDPR shall be fulfilled in practice. If there is no clarity as to the manner in which the obligations are to be fulfilled, in particular in relation to data subject rights, both the targeter and the social media provider will be considered as acting in violation of Article 26(1) GDPR. Moreover, in such cases, both (joint) controllers will not have implemented --- PAGE 38 --- Adopted appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure and to be able to demonstrate that processing is performed in accordance with the GDPR and therefore will have breached their obligations under Articles 5(2) and 24. 9.2 Levels of responsibility The EDPB observes that targeters who wish to use targeting tools provided by a social media provider may be confronted with the need to adhere to pre-defined arrangements, without any possibility to negotiate or make modifications (‘take it or leave it’ conditions). The EDPB considers that such a situation does not negate the joint responsibility of the social media provider and the targeter and cannot serve to exempt either party from its obligations under the GDPR. Both parties to the joint arrangement are also bound to ensure that the allocation of responsibilities duly reflects their respective roles and relationships vis-à-vis data the subjects in a practical, truthful and transparent manner. It is important to stress that an arrangement pursuant to Article 26 GDPR cannot override the legal obligations incumbent upon a (joint) controller. While joint controllers shall, in accordance with Article 26 GDPR “determine their respective responsibilities for compliance” with the GDPR, each controller remains, as a matter of principle, responsible for the compliance of processing. This means that each controller is – inter alia – responsible for compliance with the principles set out under Article 5(1) GDPR, including the principle of lawfulness established under Article 5(1)(a) GDPR. However, the degree of responsibility of the targeter and of the social media provider in relation to specific obligations may vary. In Wirtschaftsakademie, the CJEU noted that “the existence of joint responsibility does not necessarily imply equal responsibility of the various operators involved in the processing of personal data. [...] those operators may be involved at different stages of that processing of personal data and to different degrees, so that the level of responsibility of each of them must be assessed with regard to all the relevant circumstances of the particular case”. 105 In other words, although joint controllers are both responsible for complying with the obligations under the GDPR, and although the data subject may exercise his or her rights as against each of the controllers, their level of responsibility must be assessed on their actual role in the processing. In Google Spain, the CJEU clarified that a controller must ensure, “within the framework of its responsibilities, powers and capabilities”, that the processing of personal data meets the requirements of EU data protection law.106 When it comes to assessing the level of responsibility of targeters and social media providers, several factors may be relevant, such as the ability to influence the processing on a practical level, as well as the actual or constructive knowledge of each of the joint controllers. It is also important to be clear at what stage of the processing and to what extent or degree the targeter and the social media provider are responsible for the processing.107 In Example 1, Company X sets up an advertising campaign so that users corresponding to specific targeting criteria may be shown advertisements for the company on the social media platform. However, although it sets the parameters for the advertising campaign, it does not collect or have 105 CJEU judgment of 05 June 2018, Wirtschaftsakademie, C-210/16, paragraph 43. 106 See also CJEU, C-131/12, Google Spain (“responsibilities, powers and capabilities"). 107 The EDPB considers that in a variety of cases an assessment based on the criteria mentioned above (e.g. the data used to establish the targeting criteria, the matching of the data subject, the collection of consent) will likely lead to the outcome that it is the social media provider that has more factual influence on the processing and therefore has a higher degree of responsibility, depending on the specific targeting mechanism being used. --- PAGE 39 --- Adopted access to any personal data, nor does it have any direct contact with the data subject. Each of these elements may be relevant when assessing the level (or “degree”) or responsibility of the targeter and social media provider in case a violation of the GDPR is established (e.g. in case of lack of transparency towards the data subject or failure to ensure lawfulness of processing). As indicated earlier, notwithstanding, both parties are obliged to undertake appropriate measures in order to meet the requirements of the GDPR and protect the rights of data subjects against unlawful forms of processing. In Example 3, which involved list-based targeting, the situation is slightly different than Example 1. In Example 3, the bank initially collected the personal data and shared it with the social media provider for targeting purposes. In that case, the targeter has voluntarily caused the collection and transmission stage of the data processing. Each of these elements should be taken into account when assessing the level of responsibility of each actor and should be duly reflected in the terms of the joint arrangement. Similarly, in Example 4, in case of pixel-based targeting, it should be taken into account that the website operator enables the transmission of personal data to the social media provider. It is indeed the website “BestBags.com” that integrates a tracking pixel on its website so that it can target Mr Schmidt, although he has decided not to make a purchase108. The website is therefore actively involved in the collection and transmission of the data. As a joint controller, however, the social media provider is also under an obligation to undertake appropriate measures to meet the requirements of the GDPR and protect