that is the case, however, the social media provider remains ultimately responsible for ensuring that the data subject has been provided with the relevant information in relation to all the processing activities for which it is (alone) responsible. This obligation would not apply if Mr. Lopez has already been informed by the Bank of this processing, according to Article 14(5)(a) GDPR. These transparency obligations are to be considered without prejudice of the specific obligations applicable to legal basis considerations. Each joint controller is responsible for ensuring that that the essence of the arrangement is made available to the data subject. In practice, the essence of the arrangement should be directly available on the platform, referred to in its privacy policy, and also made directly accessible by a link, for example, in the targeter’s page on the social media platform or in links such as “why am I seeing this ad?”. 6.2 Right of access (Article 15) Data controllers must enable users to easily and fully exercise their data subjects’ rights. An easy-to- use and efficient tool should be available for the data subject to ensure the easy exercise of all of their rights, at any time, in particular the right to erasure, to object, and the right of access pursuant to with the purposes for which they were originally collected by the controller sharing the data. It should be good practice that the controller that intends to process personal data for further purposes provides sufficient means to the other controller that transmits personal data to ascertain that there is indeed a legal basis, which would likely be consent, and data subjects have been properly informed as this would enable the targeter to ensure that the transfer to the social media provider is lawful. --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted Article 15 GDPR.95 The following paragraphs focus on how and by whom the right of access should be accommodated in the context of targeting of social media users.96 In general, to fulfill the requirements of Article 15 (1) GDPR and to ensure full transparency, controllers may want to consider implementing a mechanism for data subjects to check their profile, including details of the information and sources used to develop it. The data subject should be able to learn the identity of the targeter, and controllers should facilitate access to information regarding the targeting, including the targeting criteria that were used, as well as the other information required by Article 15 GDPR.97 As regards the kind of access to be provided to data subjects, recital 63 advises that “[w]here possible, the controller should be able to provide remote access to a secure system which would provide the data subject with direct access to his or her personal data.” The specific features of social media providers - the online environment, the existence of a user account - suggest the possibility to easily grant the data subject with remote access to the personal data concerning him or her in accordance with Article 15 (1), (2) GDPR. Remote access in this case can be regarded as the most “appropriate measure” in the sense of Article 12(1) GDPR, also taking into account the fact that this is a typical situation “where the proliferation of actors and the technological complexity of practice make it difficult for the data subject to know and understand whether, by whom and for what purpose personal data relating to him or her are being collected” (see recital 58, which explicitly adds “online advertising” as concrete example). In addition, if requested, social media users who have been targeted should also be given a copy of the personal data relating to them in accordance with Article 15(3) GDPR. According to Article 15(1)(c) GDPR, the user shall have access in particular to information on “the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or will be disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or international organisations”. According to Article 4(9), the term “recipient” refers to a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether they are a third party or not. A targeter will not necessarily be a “recipient” of the personal data (see Example 1), as the personal data might not be disclosed to it, but it will receive statistics of the targeted customers in aggregated or anonymised form, e.g. as part of its campaign, or in a performance review of the same. Nevertheless, to the extent that the targeter acts as a joint controller, it must be identified as such to the social media user. Although Article 15 GDPR is not explicitly identified in Article 26(1) GDPR, the wording of this Article refers to all “responsibilities for compliance” under GDPR, which includes Article 15 GDPR. In order to enable data subjects to exercise their rights in an effective and easily accessible way, the arrangement between the social media provider and the targeter may designate a single point of contact for data subjects. Joint controllers are in principle free to determine amongst themselves who should be in charge of responding to and complying with data subject requests, but they cannot 95 Article 15 (1), (2) GDPR detail the information to be given to the data subject asking for access to her data. Article 15 (3), (4) GDPR regulate the right to obtain a copy. 96 See EDPB, Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679, p. 35. 97 For further details regarding information pursuant to Art. 15 GPDR in the context of profiling, see Art. 29 Data Protection Working Party, WP 251rev.01, p. 17 for (“Article 15 gives the data subject the right to obtain details of any personal data used for profiling, including the categories of data used to construct a profile. In addition to general information about the processing, pursuant to Article 15(3), the controller has a duty to make available the data used as input to create the profile as well as access to information on the profile and details of which segments the data subject has been placed into”). It is important that such information should be tailored to the particular situation of the data subject, complementing any information already given under Articles 1 and 14. --- PAGE 30 --- Adopted exclude the possibility for the data subject to exercise his or her rights in respect of and against each of them (Article 26 (3) of the GDPR). Hence, targeters and social media providers must ensure that a suitable mechanism is in place to allow the data subjects to obtain access to his or her personal data in a user-friendly manner (including the targeting criteria used) and all information required by Article 15 of the GDPR. DATA PROTECTION IMPACT ASSESSMENTS (DPIA) In principle, prior to initiating the envisaged targeting operations, both joint controllers should check the list of processing operations “likely to result in a high risk” adopted at national level under Article 35(4) and recitals (71), (75) and (91) GDPR to determine if the designated targeting matches any of the types of processing operations subject to the requirement to conduct a DPIA. To assess whether the envisaged targeting operations are “likely to result in a high risk” and whether a DPIA is required, the criteria identified in the guidelines on DPIA should also be taken into account98, as well as the lists that supervisory authorities have established of the kind of processing operations which are subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment (pursuant to Article 35(4)). In some cases, the nature of the product or service advertised, the content of the message or the way the advert is delivered might produce effects on individuals whose impact has to be further assessed. This might be the case, for example, with products which are targeted at vulnerable people. Additional risks may emerge depending on the purposes of the advertising campaign and its intrusiveness, or if the targeting involves the processing of observed, inferred or derived personal data. In addition to the obligations specifically referred to in Article 26 (1) GDPR, joint controllers should also consider other obligations when determining their respective obligations. As stated in the EDPB guidelines on DPIAs “When the processing operation involves joint controllers, they need to define their respective obligations precisely”. As a consequence, both joint controllers need to assess whether a DPIA is necessary. If a DPIA is necessary, they are both responsible for fulfilling this obligation. The EDPB recalls that the DPIA should tackle the entire processing of personal data, which means that in principle both joint controllers need to take part in the realization of the DPIA. In this context, both controllers need to ensure that they have a sufficient level of information on the processing to carry out the required DPIA.99This implies that “each data controller should express his needs and share useful information without either compromising secrets (e.g.: protection of trade secrets, intellectual property, confidential business information) or disclosing vulnerabilities”.100 In practice, it is possible that joint controllers