subject to management supervision by those authorities or bodies, or has an administrative, managerial or supervisory board, more than half of whose members are appointed by the State, regional authorities or by other bodies governed by public law; (d) it has the power to address to natural or legal persons admin­ istrative or regulatory decisions affecting their rights in the cross-border movement of persons, goods, services or capital; ▼B --- PAGE 12 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 12 (36) ‘public electronic communications network’ means a public elec­ tronic communications network as defined in Article 2, point (8), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972; (37) ‘electronic communications service’ means an electronic communi­ cations service as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972; (38) ‘entity’ means a natural or legal person created and recognised as such under the national law of its place of establishment, which may, acting under its own name, exercise rights and be subject to obligations; (39) ‘managed service provider’ means an entity that provides services related to the installation, management, operation or maintenance of ICT products, networks, infrastructure, applications or any other network and information systems, via assistance or active admin­ istration carried out either on customers’ premises or remotely; (40) ‘managed security service provider’ means a managed service provider that carries out or provides assistance for activities relating to cybersecurity risk management; (41) ‘research organisation’ means an entity which has as its primary goal to conduct applied research or experimental development with a view to exploiting the results of that research for commercial purposes, but which does not include educational institutions. CHAPTER II COORDINATED CYBERSECURITY FRAMEWORKS Article 7 National cybersecurity strategy 1. Each Member State shall adopt a national cybersecurity strategy that provides for the strategic objectives, the resources required to achieve those objectives, and appropriate policy and regulatory measures, with a view to achieving and maintaining a high level of cybersecurity. The national cybersecurity strategy shall include: (a) objectives and priorities of the Member State’s cybersecurity strategy covering in particular the sectors referred to in Annexes I and II; (b) a governance framework to achieve the objectives and priorities referred to in point (a) of this paragraph, including the policies referred to in paragraph 2; (c) a governance framework clarifying the roles and responsibilities of relevant stakeholders at national level, underpinning the cooperation and coordination at the national level between the competent author­ ities, the single points of contact, and the CSIRTs under this Directive, as well as coordination and cooperation between those bodies and competent authorities under sector-specific Union legal acts; ▼B --- PAGE 13 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 13 (d) a mechanism to identify relevant assets and an assessment of the risks in that Member State; (e) an identification of the measures ensuring preparedness for, respon­ siveness to and recovery from incidents, including cooperation between the public and private sectors; (f) a list of the various authorities and stakeholders involved in the implementation of the national cybersecurity strategy; (g) a policy framework for enhanced coordination between the competent authorities under this Directive and the competent auth­ orities under Directive (EU) 2022/2557 for the purpose of information sharing on risks, cyber threats, and incidents as well as on non-cyber risks, threats and incidents and the exercise of supervisory tasks, as appropriate; (h) a plan, including necessary measures, to enhance the general level of cybersecurity awareness among citizens. 2. As part of the national cybersecurity strategy, Member States shall in particular adopt policies: (a) addressing cybersecurity in the supply chain for ICT products and ICT services used by entities for the provision of their services; (b) on the inclusion and specification of cybersecurity-related requirements for ICT products and ICT services in public procurement, including in relation to cybersecurity certification, encryption and the use of open-source cybersecurity products; (c) managing vulnerabilities, encompassing the promotion and facili­ tation of coordinated vulnerability disclosure under Article 12(1); (d) related to sustaining the general availability, integrity and confiden­ tiality of the public core of the open internet, including, where relevant, the cybersecurity of undersea communications cables; (e) promoting the development and integration of relevant advanced technologies aiming to implement state-of-the-art cybersecurity risk-management measures; (f) promoting and developing education and training on cybersecurity, cybersecurity skills, awareness raising and research and develop­ ment initiatives, as well as guidance on good cyber hygiene practices and controls, aimed at citizens, stakeholders and entities; (g) supporting academic and research institutions to develop, enhance and promote the deployment of cybersecurity tools and secure network infrastructure; ▼B --- PAGE 14 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 14 (h) including relevant procedures and appropriate information-sharing tools to support voluntary cybersecurity information sharing between entities in accordance with Union law; (i) strengthening the cyber resilience and the cyber hygiene baseline of small and medium-sized enterprises, in particular those excluded from the scope of this Directive, by providing easily accessible guidance and assistance for their specific needs; (j) promoting active cyber protection. 3. Member States shall notify their national cybersecurity strategies to the Commission within three months of their adoption. Member States may exclude information which relates to their national security from such notifications. 4. Member States shall assess their national cybersecurity strategies on a regular basis and at least every five years on the basis of key performance indicators and, where necessary, update them. ENISA shall assist Member States, upon their request, in the development or the update of a national cybersecurity strategy and of key performance indicators for the assessment of that strategy, in order to align it with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Directive. Article 8 Competent authorities and single points of contact 1. Each Member State shall designate or establish one or more competent authorities responsible for cybersecurity and for the super­ visory tasks referred to in Chapter VII (competent authorities). 2. The competent authorities referred to in paragraph 1 shall monitor the implementation of this Directive at national level. 3. Each Member State shall designate or establish a single point of contact. Where a Member State designates or establishes only one competent authority pursuant to paragraph 1, that competent authority shall also be the single point of contact for that Member State. 4. Each single point of contact shall exercise a liaison function to ensure cross-border cooperation of its Member State’s authorities with the relevant authorities of other Member States, and, where appropriate, with the Commission and ENISA, as well as to ensure cross-sectoral cooperation with other competent authorities within its Member State. 5. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities and single points of contact have adequate resources to carry out, in an effective and efficient manner, the tasks assigned to them and thereby to fulfil the objectives of this Directive. 6. Each Member State shall notify the Commission without undue delay of the identity of the competent authority referred to in paragraph 1 and of the single point of contact referred to in paragraph 3, of the tasks of those authorities, and of any subsequent changes thereto. Each Member State shall make public the identity of its competent authority. The Commission shall make a list of the single points of contact publicly available. ▼B --- PAGE 15 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 15 Article 9 National cyber crisis management frameworks 1. Each Member State shall designate or establish one or more competent authorities responsible for the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises (cyber crisis management authorities). Member States shall ensure that those authorities have adequate resources to carry out, in an effective and efficient manner, the tasks assigned to them. Member States shall ensure coherence with the existing frameworks for general national crisis management. 2. Where a Member State designates or establishes more than one cyber crisis management authority pursuant to paragraph 1, it shall clearly indicate which of those authorities is to serve as the coordinator for the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises. 3. Each Member State shall identify capabilities, assets and procedures that can be deployed in the case of a crisis for the purposes of this Directive. 4. Each Member State shall adopt a national large-scale cybersecurity incident and crisis response plan where the objectives of and arrangements for the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises are set out. That plan shall lay down, in particular: (a) the objectives of national preparedness measures and activities; (b) the tasks and responsibilities of the cyber crisis management author­ ities; (c) the cyber crisis management procedures, including their integration into the general national crisis management framework and information exchange channels; (d) national preparedness measures, including exercises and training activities; (e) the relevant public and private stakeholders and infrastructure involved; (f) national procedures and arrangements between relevant national authorities and bodies to ensure the Member State’s effective participation in and support of the coordinated management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises at Union level. 5. Within three months of the