by the audited entity, except in duly substantiated cases when the competent authority decides otherwise. 3. When exercising their powers under paragraph 2, point (d), (e) or (f), the competent authorities shall state the purpose of the request and specify the information requested. 4. Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities, when exercising their enforcement powers in relation to important entities, have the power at least to: (a) issue warnings about infringements of this Directive by the entities concerned; (b) adopt binding instructions or an order requiring the entities concerned to remedy the deficiencies identified or the infringement of this Directive; (c) order the entities concerned to cease conduct that infringes this Directive and desist from repeating that conduct; (d) order the entities concerned to ensure that their cybersecurity risk- management measures comply with Article 21 or to fulfil the reporting obligations laid down in Article 23, in a specified manner and within a specified period; ▼B --- PAGE 45 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 45 (e) order the entities concerned to inform the natural or legal persons with regard to which they provide services or carry out activities which are potentially affected by a significant cyber threat of the nature of the threat, as well as of any possible protective or remedial measures which can be taken by those natural or legal persons in response to that threat; (f) order the entities concerned to implement the recommendations provided as a result of a security audit within a reasonable deadline; (g) order the entities concerned to make public aspects of infringements of this Directive in a specified manner; (h) impose, or request the imposition by the relevant bodies, courts or tribunals, in accordance with national law, of an administrative fine pursuant to Article 34 in addition to any of the measures referred to in points (a) to (g) of this paragraph. 5. Article 32(6), (7) and (8) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the supervisory and enforcement measures provided for in this Article for important entities. 6. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities under this Directive cooperate with the relevant competent authorities of the Member State concerned under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. In particular, Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities under this Directive inform the Oversight Forum established pursuant to Article 32(1) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 when exercising their supervisory and enforcement powers aimed at ensuring compliance of an important entity that is designated as a critical ICT third-party service provider pursuant to Article 31 of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554. with this Directive. Article 34 General conditions for imposing administrative fines on essential and important entities 1. Member States shall ensure that the administrative fines imposed on essential and important entities pursuant to this Article in respect of infringements of this Directive are effective, proportionate and dissuasive, taking into account the circumstances of each individual case. 2. Administrative fines shall be imposed in addition to any of the measures referred to in Article 32(4), points (a) to (h), Article 32(5) and Article 33(4), points (a) to (g). 3. When deciding whether to impose an administrative fine and deciding on its amount in each individual case, due regard shall be given, as a minimum, to the elements provided for in Article 32(7). 4. Member States shall ensure that where they infringe Article 21 or 23, essential entities are subject, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, to administrative fines of a maximum of at least EUR 10 000 000 or of a maximum of at least 2 % of the total worldwide annual turnover in the preceding financial year of the under­ taking to which the essential entity belongs, whichever is higher. ▼B --- PAGE 46 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 46 5. Member States shall ensure that where they infringe Article 21 or 23, important entities are subject, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, to administrative fines of a maximum of at least EUR 7 000 000 or of a maximum of at least 1,4 % of the total worldwide annual turnover in the preceding financial year of the under­ taking to which the important entity belongs, whichever is higher. 6. Member States may provide for the power to impose periodic penalty payments in order to compel an essential or important entity to cease an infringement of this Directive in accordance with a prior decision of the competent authority. 7. Without prejudice to the powers of the competent authorities pursuant to Articles 32 and 33, each Member State may lay down the rules on whether and to what extent administrative fines may be imposed on public administration entities. 8. Where the legal system of a Member State does not provide for administrative fines, that Member State shall ensure that this Article is applied in such a manner that the fine is initiated by the competent authority and imposed by competent national courts or tribunals, while ensuring that those legal remedies are effective and have an equivalent effect to the administrative fines imposed by the competent authorities. In any event, the fines imposed shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. The Member State shall notify to the Commission the provisions of the laws which it adopts pursuant to this paragraph by 17 October 2024 and, without delay, any subsequent amendment law or amendment affecting them. Article 35 Infringements entailing a personal data breach 1. Where the competent authorities become aware in the course of supervision or enforcement that the infringement by an essential or important entity of the obligations laid down in Articles 21 and 23 of this Directive can entail a personal data breach, as defined in Article 4, point (12), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 which is to be notified pursuant to Article 33 of that Regulation, they shall, without undue delay, inform the supervisory authorities as referred to in Article 55 or 56 of that Regulation. 2. Where the supervisory authorities as referred to in Article 55 or 56 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 58(2), point (i), of that Regulation, the competent authorities shall not impose an administrative fine pursuant to Article 34 of this Directive for an infringement referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article arising from the same conduct as that which was the subject of the administrative fine under Article 58(2), point (i), of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. The competent authorities may, however, impose the enforce­ ment measures provided for in Article 32(4), points (a) to (h), Article 32(5) and Article 33(4), points (a) to (g), of this Directive. 3. Where the supervisory authority competent pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 is established in another Member State than the competent authority, the competent authority shall inform the super­ visory authority established in its own Member State of the potential data breach referred to in paragraph 1. ▼B --- PAGE 47 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 47 Article 36 Penalties Member States shall lay down rules on penalties applicable to infringements of national measures adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are imple­ mented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive. Member States shall, by 17 January 2025, notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures and shall notify it, without delay of any subsequent amendment affecting them. Article 37 Mutual assistance 1. Where an entity provides services in more than one Member State, or provides services in one or more Member States and its network and information systems are located in one or more other Member States, the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall cooperate with and assist each other as necessary. That cooperation shall entail, at least, that: (a) the competent authorities applying supervisory or enforcement measures in a Member State shall, via the single point of contact, inform and consult the competent authorities in the other Member States concerned on the supervisory and enforcement measures taken; (b) a competent authority may request another competent authority to take supervisory or enforcement measures; (c) a competent authority shall, upon receipt of a substantiated request from another competent authority, provide the other competent authority with mutual assistance proportionate to its own resources so that the supervisory or enforcement measures can be implemented in an effective, efficient and consistent manner. The mutual assistance referred to in the first subparagraph, point (c), may cover information requests and supervisory measures, including requests to carry out on-site inspections or off-site supervision or targeted security audits. A competent authority to which a request for assistance is addressed shall not refuse that request unless it is estab­ lished that it does not have the competence to provide the requested assistance, the requested assistance is not proportionate to the super­ visory tasks of the competent authority, or the request concerns information or entails activities which, if disclosed or carried out, would be contrary to