particular through raising awareness in relation to cyber threats, limiting or impeding the ability of such threats to spread, supporting a range of defensive capabilities, vulnerability remediation and disclosure, threat detection, containment and prevention techniques, mitigation strat­ egies, or response and recovery stages or promoting collaborative cyber threat research between public and private entities. 2. Member States shall ensure that the exchange of information takes place within communities of essential and important entities, and where relevant, their suppliers or service providers. Such exchange shall be implemented through cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements in respect of the potentially sensitive nature of the information shared. 3. Member States shall facilitate the establishment of cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Such arrangements may specify operational elements, including the use of dedicated ICT platforms and automation tools, content and conditions of the information-sharing arrangements. In laying down the details of the involvement of public authorities in such arrangements, Member States may impose conditions on the information made available by the competent authorities or the CSIRTs. Member States shall offer assistance for the application of such arrangements in accordance with their policies referred to in Article 7(2), point (h). 4. Member States shall ensure that essential and important entities notify the competent authorities of their participation in the cyberse­ curity information-sharing arrangements referred to in paragraph 2, upon entering into such arrangements, or, as applicable, of their with­ drawal from such arrangements, once the withdrawal takes effect. 5. ENISA shall provide assistance for the establishment of cyberse­ curity information-sharing arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 by exchanging best practices and providing guidance. Article 30 Voluntary notification of relevant information 1. Member States shall ensure that, in addition to the notification obligation provided for in Article 23, notifications can be submitted to the CSIRTs or, where applicable, the competent authorities, on a voluntary basis, by: (a) essential and important entities with regard to incidents, cyber threats and near misses; ▼B --- PAGE 39 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 39 (b) entities other than those referred to in point (a), regardless of whether they fall within the scope of this Directive, with regard to significant incidents, cyber threats and near misses. 2. Member States shall process the notifications referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 23. Member States may prioritise the processing of mandatory notifications over voluntary notifications. Where necessary, the CSIRTs and, where applicable, the competent authorities shall provide the single points of contact with the information about notifications received pursuant to this Article, while ensuring the confidentiality and appropriate protection of the information provided by the notifying entity. Without prejudice to the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences, voluntary reporting shall not result in the imposition of any additional obligations upon the notifying entity to which it would not have been subject had it not submitted the notification. CHAPTER VII SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT Article 31 General aspects concerning supervision and enforcement 1. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities effec­ tively supervise and take the measures necessary to ensure compliance with this Directive. 2. Member States may allow their competent authorities to prioritise supervisory tasks. Such prioritisation shall be based on a risk-based approach. To that end, when exercising their supervisory tasks provided for in Articles 32 and 33, the competent authorities may establish supervisory methodologies allowing for a prioritisation of such tasks following a risk-based approach. 3. The competent authorities shall work in close cooperation with supervisory authorities under Regulation (EU) 2016/679 when addressing incidents resulting in personal data breaches, without prejudice to the competence and tasks of the supervisory authorities under that Regulation. 4. Without prejudice to national legislative and institutional frame­ works, Member States shall ensure that, in the supervision of compliance of public administration entities with this Directive and the imposition of enforcement measures with regard to infringements of this Directive, the competent authorities have appropriate powers to carry out such tasks with operational independence vis-à-vis the public administration entities supervised. Member States may decide on the imposition of appropriate, proportionate and effective supervisory and enforcement measures in relation to those entities in accordance with the national legislative and institutional frameworks. ▼B --- PAGE 40 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 40 Article 32 Supervisory and enforcement measures in relation to essential entities 1. Member States shall ensure that the supervisory or enforcement measures imposed on essential entities in respect of the obligations laid down in this Directive are effective, proportionate and dissuasive, taking into account the circumstances of each individual case. 2. Member States shall ensure that the competent authorities, when exercising their supervisory tasks in relation to essential entities, have the power to subject those entities at least to: (a) on-site inspections and off-site supervision, including random checks conducted by trained professionals; (b) regular and targeted security audits carried out by an independent body or a competent authority; (c) ad hoc audits, including where justified on the ground of a significant incident or an infringement of this Directive by the essential entity; (d) security scans based on objective, non-discriminatory, fair and trans­ parent risk assessment criteria, where necessary with the cooperation of the entity concerned; (e) requests for information necessary to assess the cybersecurity risk- management measures adopted by the entity concerned, including documented cybersecurity policies, as well as compliance with the obligation to submit information to the competent authorities pursuant to Article 27; (f) requests to access data, documents and information necessary to carry out their supervisory tasks; (g) requests for evidence of implementation of cybersecurity policies, such as the results of security audits carried out by a qualified auditor and the respective underlying evidence. The targeted security audits referred to in the first subparagraph, point (b), shall be based on risk assessments conducted by the competent authority or the audited entity, or on other risk-related available information. The results of any targeted security audit shall be made available to the competent authority. The costs of such targeted security audit carried out by an independent body shall be paid by the audited entity, except in duly substantiated cases when the competent authority decides otherwise. 3. When exercising their powers under paragraph 2, point (e), (f) or (g), the competent authorities shall state the purpose of the request and specify the information requested. 4. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities, when exercising their enforcement powers in relation to essential entities, have the power at least to: ▼B --- PAGE 41 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 41 (a) issue warnings about infringements of this Directive by the entities concerned; (b) adopt binding instructions, including with regard to measures necessary to prevent or remedy an incident, as well as time-limits for the implementation of such measures and for reporting on their implementation, or an order requiring the entities concerned to remedy the deficiencies identified or the infringements of this Directive; (c) order the entities concerned to cease conduct that infringes this Directive and desist from repeating that conduct; (d) order the entities concerned to ensure that their cybersecurity risk- management measures comply with Article 21 or to fulfil the reporting obligations laid down in Article 23, in a specified manner and within a specified period; (e) order the entities concerned to inform the natural or legal persons with regard to which they provide services or carry out activities which are potentially affected by a significant cyber threat of the nature of the threat, as well as of any possible protective or remedial measures which can be taken by those natural or legal persons in response to that threat; (f) order the entities concerned to implement the recommendations provided as a result of a security audit within a reasonable deadline; (g) designate a monitoring officer with well-defined tasks for a determined period of time to oversee the compliance of the entities concerned with Articles 21 and 23; (h) order the entities concerned to make public aspects of infringements of this Directive in a specified manner; (i) impose, or request the imposition by the relevant bodies, courts or tribunals, in accordance with national law, of an administrative fine pursuant to Article 34 in addition to any of the measures referred to in points (a) to (h) of this paragraph. 5. Where enforcement measures adopted pursuant to paragraph 4, points (a) to (d) and (f), are ineffective, Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities have the power to establish a deadline by which the essential entity is requested to take the necessary action to remedy the deficiencies or to comply with the requirements of those authorities. If the requested action is not taken within the deadline set, Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities have the power to: (a) suspend temporarily, or request a certification or authorisation body, or a court or tribunal, in accordance with national law, to suspend temporarily a certification