(b) DNS service providers, TLD name registries, entities providing domain name registration services, cloud computing service providers, data centre service providers, content delivery network providers, managed service providers, managed security service providers, as well as providers of online marketplaces, of online search engines or of social networking services platforms, which shall be considered to fall under the jurisdiction of the Member State in which they have their main establishment in the Union under paragraph 2; (c) public administration entities, which shall be considered to fall under the jurisdiction of the Member State which established them. 2. For the purposes of this Directive, an entity as referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall be considered to have its main estab­ lishment in the Union in the Member State where the decisions related to the cybersecurity risk-management measures are predomi­ nantly taken. If such a Member State cannot be determined or if such decisions are not taken in the Union, the main establishment shall be considered to be in the Member State where cybersecurity operations are carried out. If such a Member State cannot be determined, the main establishment shall be considered to be in the Member State where the entity concerned has the establishment with the highest number of employees in the Union. 3. If an entity as referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), is not estab­ lished in the Union, but offers services within the Union, it shall designate a representative in the Union. The representative shall be established in one of those Member States where the services are offered. Such an entity shall be considered to fall under the jurisdiction of the Member State where the representative is established. In the absence of a representative in the Union designated under this para­ graph, any Member State in which the entity provides services may take legal actions against the entity for the infringement of this Directive. 4. The designation of a representative by an entity as referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), shall be without prejudice to legal actions, which could be initiated against the entity itself. 5. Member States that have received a request for mutual assistance in relation to an entity as referred to in paragraph 1, point (b), may, within the limits of that request, take appropriate supervisory and en­ forcement measures in relation to the entity concerned that provides services or which has a network and information system on their territory. Article 27 Registry of entities 1. ENISA shall create and maintain a registry of DNS service providers, TLD name registries, entities providing domain name regis­ tration services, cloud computing service providers, data centre service providers, content delivery network providers, managed service providers, managed security service providers, as well as providers of online marketplaces, of online search engines and of social networking ▼B --- PAGE 36 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 36 services platforms, on the basis of the information received from the single points of contact in accordance with paragraph 4. Upon request, ENISA shall allow the competent authorities access to that registry, while ensuring that the confidentiality of information is protected where applicable. 2. Member States shall require entities referred to in paragraph 1 to submit the following information to the competent authorities by 17 January 2025: (a) the name of the entity; (b) the relevant sector, subsector and type of entity referred to in Annex I or II, where applicable; (c) the address of the entity’s main establishment and its other legal establishments in the Union or, if not established in the Union, of its representative designated pursuant to Article 26(3); (d) up-to-date contact details, including email addresses and telephone numbers of the entity and, where applicable, its representative designated pursuant to Article 26(3); (e) the Member States where the entity provides services; and (f) the entity’s IP ranges. 3. Member States shall ensure that the entities referred to in paragraph 1 notify the competent authority about any changes to the information they submitted under paragraph 2 without delay and in any event within three months of the date of the change. 4. Upon receipt of the information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, except for that referred to in paragraph 2, point (f), the single point of contact of the Member State concerned shall, without undue delay, forward it to ENISA. 5. Where applicable, the information referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article shall be submitted through the national mechanism referred to in Article 3(4), fourth subparagraph. Article 28 Database of domain name registration data 1. For the purpose of contributing to the security, stability and resilience of the DNS, Member States shall require TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services to collect and maintain accurate and complete domain name registration data in a dedicated database with due diligence in accordance with Union data protection law as regards data which are personal data. 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, Member States shall require the database of domain name registration data to contain the necessary information to identify and contact the holders of the domain names and the points of contact administering the domain names under the TLDs. Such information shall include: ▼B --- PAGE 37 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 37 (a) the domain name; (b) the date of registration; (c) the registrant’s name, contact email address and telephone number; (d) the contact email address and telephone number of the point of contact administering the domain name in the event that they are different from those of the registrant. 3. Member States shall require the TLD name registries and the entities providing domain name registration services to have policies and procedures, including verification procedures, in place to ensure that the databases referred to in paragraph 1 include accurate and complete information. Member States shall require such policies and procedures to be made publicly available. 4. Member States shall require the TLD name registries and the entities providing domain name registration services to make publicly available, without undue delay after the registration of a domain name, the domain name registration data which are not personal data. 5. Member States shall require the TLD name registries and the entities providing domain name registration services to provide access to specific domain name registration data upon lawful and duly substantiated requests by legitimate access seekers, in accordance with Union data protection law. Member States shall require the TLD name registries and the entities providing domain name registration services to reply without undue delay and in any event within 72 hours of receipt of any requests for access. Member States shall require policies and procedures with regard to the disclosure of such data to be made publicly available. 6. Compliance with the obligations laid down in paragraphs 1 to 5 shall not result in a duplication of collecting domain name registration data. To that end, Member States shall require TLD name registries and entities providing domain name registration services to cooperate with each other. CHAPTER VI INFORMATION SHARING Article 29 Cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements 1. Member States shall ensure that entities falling within the scope of this Directive and, where relevant, other entities not falling within the scope of this Directive are able to exchange on a voluntary basis relevant cybersecurity information among themselves, including information relating to cyber threats, near misses, vulnerabilities, tech­ niques and procedures, indicators of compromise, adversarial tactics, threat-actor-specific information, cybersecurity alerts and recommen­ dations regarding configuration of cybersecurity tools to detect cybe­ rattacks, where such information sharing: ▼B --- PAGE 38 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 38 (a) aims to prevent, detect, respond to or recover from incidents or to mitigate their impact; (b) enhances the level of cybersecurity, in particular through raising awareness in relation to cyber threats, limiting or impeding the ability of such threats to spread, supporting a range of defensive capabilities, vulnerability remediation and disclosure, threat detection, containment and prevention techniques, mitigation strat­ egies, or response and recovery stages or promoting collaborative cyber threat research between public and private entities. 2. Member States shall ensure that the exchange of information takes place within communities of essential and important entities, and where relevant, their suppliers or service providers. Such exchange shall be implemented through cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements in respect of the potentially sensitive nature of the information shared. 3. Member States shall facilitate the establishment of cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Such arrangements may specify operational elements, including the use of dedicated ICT platforms and automation tools, content and conditions of the information-sharing arrangements. In laying down the details of the involvement of public authorities in such arrangements, Member States may impose conditions on the information made available by the competent authorities or the CSIRTs. Member States shall offer assistance for the application of such arrangements in accordance with their policies referred to in Article 7(2), point (h). 4. Member States