under Article 12(1). Article 12 Coordinated vulnerability disclosure and a European vulnerability database 1. Each Member State shall designate one of its CSIRTs as a coor­ dinator for the purposes of coordinated vulnerability disclosure. The CSIRT designated as coordinator shall act as a trusted intermediary, facilitating, where necessary, the interaction between the natural or legal person reporting a vulnerability and the manufacturer or provider of the potentially vulnerable ICT products or ICT services, upon the request of either party. The tasks of the CSIRT designated as coordinator shall include: ▼B --- PAGE 19 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 19 (a) identifying and contacting the entities concerned; (b) assisting the natural or legal persons reporting a vulnerability; and (c) negotiating disclosure timelines and managing vulnerabilities that affect multiple entities. Member States shall ensure that natural or legal persons are able to report, anonymously where they so request, a vulnerability to the CSIRT designated as coordinator. The CSIRT designated as coordinator shall ensure that diligent follow-up action is carried out with regard to the reported vulnerability and shall ensure the anonymity of the natural or legal person reporting the vulnerability. Where a reported vulner­ ability could have a significant impact on entities in more than one Member State, the CSIRT designated as coordinator of each Member State concerned shall, where appropriate, cooperate with other CSIRTs designated as coordinators within the CSIRTs network. 2. ENISA shall develop and maintain, after consulting the Cooper­ ation Group, a European vulnerability database. To that end, ENISA shall establish and maintain the appropriate information systems, policies and procedures, and shall adopt the necessary technical and organisational measures to ensure the security and integrity of the European vulnerability database, with a view in particular to enabling entities, regardless of whether they fall within the scope of this Directive, and their suppliers of network and information systems, to disclose and register, on a voluntary basis, publicly known vulner­ abilities in ICT products or ICT services. All stakeholders shall be provided access to the information about the vulnerabilities contained in the European vulnerability database. That database shall include: (a) information describing the vulnerability; (b) the affected ICT products or ICT services and the severity of the vulnerability in terms of the circumstances under which it may be exploited; (c) the availability of related patches and, in the absence of available patches, guidance provided by the competent authorities or the CSIRTs addressed to users of vulnerable ICT products and ICT services as to how the risks resulting from disclosed vulnerabilities can be mitigated. Article 13 Cooperation at national level 1. Where they are separate, the competent authorities, the single point of contact and the CSIRTs of the same Member State shall cooperate with each other with regard to the fulfilment of the obli­ gations laid down in this Directive. ▼B --- PAGE 20 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 20 2. Member States shall ensure that their CSIRTs or, where applicable, their competent authorities, receive notifications of significant incidents pursuant to Article 23, and incidents, cyber threats and near misses pursuant to Article 30. 3. Member States shall ensure that their CSIRTs or, where applicable, their competent authorities inform their single points of contact of notifications of incidents, cyber threats and near misses submitted pursuant to this Directive. 4. In order to ensure that the tasks and obligations of the competent authorities, the single points of contact and the CSIRTs are carried out effectively, Member States shall, to the extent possible, ensure appro­ priate cooperation between those bodies and law enforcement author­ ities, data protection authorities, the national authorities under Regu­ lations (EC) No 300/2008 and (EU) 2018/1139, the supervisory bodies under Regulation (EU) No 910/2014, the competent authorities under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, the national regulatory authorities under Directive (EU) 2018/1972, the competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2557, as well as the competent authorities under other sector-specific Union legal acts, within that Member State. 5. Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities under this Directive and their competent authorities under Directive (EU) 2022/2557 cooperate and exchange information on a regular basis with regard to the identification of critical entities, on risks, cyber threats, and incidents as well as on non-cyber risks, threats and incidents affecting entities identified as critical entities under Directive (EU) 2022/2557, and the measures taken in response to such risks, threats and incidents. Member States shall also ensure that their competent authorities under this Directive and their competent auth­ orities under Regulation (EU) No 910/2014, Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 and Directive (EU) 2018/1972 exchange relevant information on a regular basis, including with regard to relevant incidents and cyber threats. 6. Member States shall simplify the reporting through technical means for notifications referred to in Articles 23 and 30. CHAPTER III COOPERATION AT UNION AND INTERNATIONAL LEVEL Article 14 Cooperation Group 1. In order to support and facilitate strategic cooperation and the exchange of information among Member States, as well as to strengthen trust and confidence, a Cooperation Group is established. 2. The Cooperation Group shall carry out its tasks on the basis of biennial work programmes referred to in paragraph 7. ▼B --- PAGE 21 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 21 3. The Cooperation Group shall be composed of representatives of Member States, the Commission and ENISA. The European External Action Service shall participate in the activities of the Cooperation Group as an observer. The European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) and the competent authorities under Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 may participate in the activities of the Cooperation Group in accordance with Article 47(1) of that Regulation. Where appropriate, the Cooperation Group may invite the European Parliament and representatives of relevant stakeholders to participate in its work. The Commission shall provide the secretariat. 4. The Cooperation Group shall have the following tasks: (a) to provide guidance to the competent authorities in relation to the transposition and implementation of this Directive; (b) to provide guidance to the competent authorities in relation to the development and implementation of policies on coordinated vulner­ ability disclosure, as referred to in Article 7(2), point (c); (c) to exchange best practices and information in relation to the im­ plementation of this Directive, including in relation to cyber threats, incidents, vulnerabilities, near misses, awareness-raising initiatives, training, exercises and skills, capacity building, standards and technical specifications as well as the identification of essential and important entities pursuant to Article 2(2), points (b) to (e); (d) to exchange advice and cooperate with the Commission on emerging cybersecurity policy initiatives and the overall consistency of sector-specific cybersecurity requirements; (e) to exchange advice and cooperate with the Commission on draft delegated or implementing acts adopted pursuant to this Directive; (f) to exchange best practices and information with relevant Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies; (g) to exchange views on the implementation of sector-specific Union legal acts that contain provisions on cybersecurity; (h) where relevant, to discuss reports on the peer review referred to in Article 19(9) and draw up conclusions and recommendations; (i) to carry out coordinated security risk assessments of critical supply chains in accordance with Article 22(1); ▼B --- PAGE 22 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 22 (j) to discuss cases of mutual assistance, including experiences and results from cross-border joint supervisory actions as referred to in Article 37; (k) upon the request of one or more Member States concerned, to discuss specific requests for mutual assistance as referred to in Article 37; (l) to provide strategic guidance to the CSIRTs network and EU- CyCLONe on specific emerging issues; (m) to exchange views on the policy on follow-up actions following large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises on the basis of lessons learned of the CSIRTs network and EU-CyCLONe; (n) to contribute to cybersecurity capabilities across the Union by facilitating the exchange of national officials through a capacity building programme involving staff from the competent authorities or the CSIRTs; (o) to organise regular joint meetings with relevant private stakeholders from across the Union to discuss activities carried out by the Co­ operation Group and gather input on emerging policy challenges; (p) to discuss the work undertaken in relation to cybersecurity exercises, including the work done by ENISA; (q) to establish the methodology and organisational aspects of the peer reviews referred to in Article 19(1), as well as to lay down the self- assessment methodology for Member States in accordance with Article 19(5), with the assistance of the Commission and ENISA, and, in cooperation with the Commission and ENISA, to develop codes of conduct underpinning the working methods of designated cybersecurity experts in accordance with Article 19(6); (r) to prepare reports for the purpose of the review referred to in Article 40 on the experience gained at a strategic level and from peer reviews; (s) to discuss and carry out on a regular basis an assessment of the state of play of cyber threats or incidents, such as ransomware. The Cooperation Group shall submit the reports referred to