more than one cyber crisis management authority pursuant to paragraph 1, it shall clearly indicate which of those authorities is to serve as the coordinator for the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises. 3. Each Member State shall identify capabilities, assets and procedures that can be deployed in the case of a crisis for the purposes of this Directive. 4. Each Member State shall adopt a national large-scale cybersecurity incident and crisis response plan where the objectives of and arrangements for the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises are set out. That plan shall lay down, in particular: (a) the objectives of national preparedness measures and activities; (b) the tasks and responsibilities of the cyber crisis management author­ ities; (c) the cyber crisis management procedures, including their integration into the general national crisis management framework and information exchange channels; (d) national preparedness measures, including exercises and training activities; (e) the relevant public and private stakeholders and infrastructure involved; (f) national procedures and arrangements between relevant national authorities and bodies to ensure the Member State’s effective participation in and support of the coordinated management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises at Union level. 5. Within three months of the designation or establishment of the cyber crisis management authority referred to in paragraph 1, each Member State shall notify the Commission of the identity of its authority and of any subsequent changes thereto. Member States shall submit to the Commission and to the European cyber crisis liaison organisation network (EU-CyCLONe) relevant information relating to the requirements of paragraph 4 about their national large-scale cyberse­ curity incident and crisis response plans within three months of the adoption of those plans. Member States may exclude information where and to the extent that such exclusion is necessary for their national security. ▼B --- PAGE 16 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 16 Article 10 Computer security incident response teams (CSIRTs) 1. Each Member State shall designate or establish one or more CSIRTs. The CSIRTs may be designated or established within a competent authority. The CSIRTs shall comply with the requirements set out in Article 11(1), shall cover at least the sectors, subsectors and types of entity referred to in Annexes I and II, and shall be responsible for incident handling in accordance with a well-defined process. 2. Member States shall ensure that each CSIRT has adequate resources to carry out effectively its tasks as set out in Article 11(3). 3. Member States shall ensure that each CSIRT has at its disposal an appropriate, secure, and resilient communication and information infra­ structure through which to exchange information with essential and important entities and other relevant stakeholders. To that end, Member States shall ensure that each CSIRT contributes to the deployment of secure information-sharing tools. 4. The CSIRTs shall cooperate and, where appropriate, exchange relevant information in accordance with Article 29 with sectoral or cross-sectoral communities of essential and important entities. 5. The CSIRTs shall participate in peer reviews organised in accordance with Article 19. 6. Member States shall ensure the effective, efficient and secure co­ operation of their CSIRTs in the CSIRTs network. 7. The CSIRTs may establish cooperation relationships with third countries’ national computer security incident response teams. As part of such cooperation relationships, Member States shall facilitate effective, efficient and secure information exchange with those third countries’ national computer security incident response teams, using relevant information-sharing protocols, including the traffic light protocol. The CSIRTs may exchange relevant information with third countries’ national computer security incident response teams, including personal data in accordance with Union data protection law. 8. The CSIRTs may cooperate with third countries’ national computer security incident response teams or equivalent third-country bodies, in particular for the purpose of providing them with cyberse­ curity assistance. 9. Each Member State shall notify the Commission without undue delay of the identity of the CSIRT referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article and the CSIRT designated as coordinator pursuant to Article 12(1), of their respective tasks in relation to essential and important entities, and of any subsequent changes thereto. 10. Member States may request the assistance of ENISA in developing their CSIRTs. ▼B --- PAGE 17 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 17 Article 11 Requirements, technical capabilities and tasks of CSIRTs 1. The CSIRTs shall comply with the following requirements: (a) the CSIRTs shall ensure a high level of availability of their communication channels by avoiding single points of failure, and shall have several means for being contacted and for contacting others at all times; they shall clearly specify the communication channels and make them known to constituency and cooperative partners; (b) the CSIRTs’ premises and the supporting information systems shall be located at secure sites; (c) the CSIRTs shall be equipped with an appropriate system for managing and routing requests, in particular to facilitate effective and efficient handovers; (d) the CSIRTs shall ensure the confidentiality and trustworthiness of their operations; (e) the CSIRTs shall be adequately staffed to ensure availability of their services at all times and they shall ensure that their staff is trained appropriately; (f) the CSIRTs shall be equipped with redundant systems and backup working space to ensure continuity of their services. The CSIRTs may participate in international cooperation networks. 2. Member States shall ensure that their CSIRTs jointly have the technical capabilities necessary to carry out the tasks referred to in paragraph 3. Member States shall ensure that sufficient resources are allocated to their CSIRTs to ensure adequate staffing levels for the purpose of enabling the CSIRTs to develop their technical capabilities. 3. The CSIRTs shall have the following tasks: (a) monitoring and analysing cyber threats, vulnerabilities and incidents at national level and, upon request, providing assistance to essential and important entities concerned regarding real-time or near real- time monitoring of their network and information systems; (b) providing early warnings, alerts, announcements and dissemination of information to essential and important entities concerned as well as to the competent authorities and other relevant stakeholders on cyber threats, vulnerabilities and incidents, if possible in near real- time; (c) responding to incidents and providing assistance to the essential and important entities concerned, where applicable; ▼B --- PAGE 18 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 18 (d) collecting and analysing forensic data and providing dynamic risk and incident analysis and situational awareness regarding cyberse­ curity; (e) providing, upon the request of an essential or important entity, a proactive scanning of the network and information systems of the entity concerned to detect vulnerabilities with a potential significant impact; (f) participating in the CSIRTs network and providing mutual assistance in accordance with their capacities and competencies to other members of the CSIRTs network upon their request; (g) where applicable, acting as a coordinator for the purposes of the coordinated vulnerability disclosure under Article 12(1); (h) contributing to the deployment of secure information-sharing tools pursuant to Article 10(3). The CSIRTs may carry out proactive non-intrusive scanning of publicly accessible network and information systems of essential and important entities. Such scanning shall be carried out to detect vulnerable or insecurely configured network and information systems and inform the entities concerned. Such scanning shall not have any negative impact on the functioning of the entities’ services. When carrying out the tasks referred to in the first subparagraph, the CSIRTs may prioritise particular tasks on the basis of a risk-based approach. 4. The CSIRTs shall establish cooperation relationships with relevant stakeholders in the private sector, with a view to achieving the objectives of this Directive. 5. In order to facilitate cooperation referred to in paragraph 4, the CSIRTs shall promote the adoption and use of common or standardised practices, classification schemes and taxonomies in relation to: (a) incident-handling procedures; (b) crisis management; and (c) coordinated vulnerability disclosure under Article 12(1). Article 12 Coordinated vulnerability disclosure and a European vulnerability database 1. Each Member State shall designate one of its CSIRTs as a coor­ dinator for the purposes of coordinated vulnerability disclosure. The CSIRT designated as coordinator shall act as a trusted intermediary, facilitating, where necessary, the interaction between the natural or legal person reporting a vulnerability and the manufacturer or provider of the potentially vulnerable ICT products or ICT services, upon the request of either party. The tasks of the CSIRT designated as coordinator shall include: ▼B --- PAGE 19 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 19 (a) identifying and contacting the entities concerned; (b) assisting the natural or legal persons reporting a vulnerability; and (c) negotiating disclosure timelines and managing vulnerabilities that affect multiple entities. Member States shall ensure that natural or legal persons are able to report, anonymously where they so request, a vulnerability to the CSIRT designated as coordinator. The CSIRT designated as coordinator shall ensure that diligent follow-up action is carried out with regard to the reported vulnerability and shall ensure the anonymity of the natural or legal person reporting the vulnerability. Where a reported vulner­ ability could have a