Union by facilitating the exchange of national officials through a capacity building programme involving staff from the competent authorities or the CSIRTs; (o) to organise regular joint meetings with relevant private stakeholders from across the Union to discuss activities carried out by the Co­ operation Group and gather input on emerging policy challenges; (p) to discuss the work undertaken in relation to cybersecurity exercises, including the work done by ENISA; (q) to establish the methodology and organisational aspects of the peer reviews referred to in Article 19(1), as well as to lay down the self- assessment methodology for Member States in accordance with Article 19(5), with the assistance of the Commission and ENISA, and, in cooperation with the Commission and ENISA, to develop codes of conduct underpinning the working methods of designated cybersecurity experts in accordance with Article 19(6); (r) to prepare reports for the purpose of the review referred to in Article 40 on the experience gained at a strategic level and from peer reviews; (s) to discuss and carry out on a regular basis an assessment of the state of play of cyber threats or incidents, such as ransomware. The Cooperation Group shall submit the reports referred to in the first subparagraph, point (r), to the Commission, to the European Parliament and to the Council. 5. Member States shall ensure effective, efficient and secure cooper­ ation of their representatives in the Cooperation Group. 6. The Cooperation Group may request from the CSIRTs network a technical report on selected topics. 7. By 1 February 2024 and every two years thereafter, the Cooper­ ation Group shall establish a work programme in respect of actions to be undertaken to implement its objectives and tasks. ▼B --- PAGE 23 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 23 8. The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down procedural arrangements necessary for the functioning of the Cooper­ ation Group. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the exa­ mination procedure referred to in Article 39(2). The Commission shall exchange advice and cooperate with the Cooper­ ation Group on the draft implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph in accordance with paragraph (4), point (e). 9. The Cooperation Group shall meet on a regular basis and in any event at least once a year with the Critical Entities Resilience Group established under Directive (EU) 2022/2557 to promote and facilitate strategic cooperation and the exchange of information. Article 15 CSIRTs network 1. In order to contribute to the development of confidence and trust and to promote swift and effective operational cooperation among Member States, a network of national CSIRTs is established. 2. The CSIRTs network shall be composed of representatives of the CSIRTs designated or established pursuant to Article 10 and the computer emergency response team for the Union’s institutions, bodies and agencies (CERT-EU). The Commission shall participate in the CSIRTs network as an observer. ENISA shall provide the secretariat and shall actively provide assistance for the cooperation among the CSIRTs. 3. The CSIRTs network shall have the following tasks: (a) to exchange information about the CSIRTs’ capabilities; (b) to facilitate the sharing, transfer and exchange of technology and relevant measures, policies, tools, processes, best practices and frameworks among the CSIRTs; (c) to exchange relevant information about incidents, near misses, cyber threats, risks and vulnerabilities; (d) to exchange information with regard to cybersecurity publications and recommendations; (e) to ensure interoperability with regard to information-sharing spec­ ifications and protocols; (f) at the request of a member of the CSIRTs network potentially affected by an incident, to exchange and discuss information in relation to that incident and associated cyber threats, risks and vulnerabilities; (g) at the request of a member of the CSIRTs network, to discuss and, where possible, implement a coordinated response to an incident that has been identified within the jurisdiction of that Member State; ▼B --- PAGE 24 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 24 (h) to provide Member States with assistance in addressing cross- border incidents pursuant to this Directive; (i) to cooperate, exchange best practices and provide assistance to the CSIRTs designated as coordinators pursuant to Article 12(1) with regard to the management of the coordinated disclosure of vulner­ abilities which could have a significant impact on entities in more than one Member State; (j) to discuss and identify further forms of operational cooperation, including in relation to: (i) categories of cyber threats and incidents; (ii) early warnings; (iii) mutual assistance; (iv) principles and arrangements for coordination in response to cross-border risks and incidents; (v) contribution to the national large-scale cybersecurity incident and crisis response plan referred to in Article 9(4) at the request of a Member State; (k) to inform the Cooperation Group of its activities and of the further forms of operational cooperation discussed pursuant to point (j), and, where necessary, request guidance in that regard; (l) to take stock of cybersecurity exercises, including those organised by ENISA; (m) at the request of an individual CSIRT, to discuss the capabilities and preparedness of that CSIRT; (n) to cooperate and exchange information with regional and Union- level Security Operations Centres (SOCs) in order to improve common situational awareness on incidents and cyber threats across the Union; (o) where relevant, to discuss the peer-review reports referred to in Article 19(9); (p) to provide guidelines in order to facilitate the convergence of oper­ ational practices with regard to the application of the provisions of this Article concerning operational cooperation. 4. By 17 January 2025, and every two years thereafter, the CSIRTs network shall, for the purpose of the review referred to in Article 40, assess the progress made with regard to the operational cooperation and adopt a report. The report shall, in particular, draw up conclusions and recommendations on the basis of the outcome of the peer reviews referred to in Article 19, which are carried out in relation to the national CSIRTs. That report shall be submitted to the Cooperation Group. 5. The CSIRTs network shall adopt its rules of procedure. 6. The CSIRTs network and EU-CyCLONe shall agree on procedural arrangements and cooperate on the basis thereof. ▼B --- PAGE 25 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 25 Article 16 European cyber crisis liaison organisation network (EU-CyCLONe) 1. EU-CyCLONe is established to support the coordinated management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises at opera­ tional level and to ensure the regular exchange of relevant information among Member States and Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies. 2. EU-CyCLONe shall be composed of the representatives of Member States’ cyber crisis management authorities as well as, in cases where a potential or ongoing large-scale cybersecurity incident has or is likely to have a significant impact on services and activities falling within the scope of this Directive, the Commission. In other cases, the Commission shall participate in the activities of EU- CyCLONe as an observer. ENISA shall provide the secretariat of EU-CyCLONe and support the secure exchange of information as well as provide necessary tools to support cooperation between Member States ensuring secure exchange of information. Where appropriate, EU-CyCLONe may invite representatives of relevant stakeholders to participate in its work as observers. 3. EU-CyCLONe shall have the following tasks: (a) to increase the level of preparedness of the management of large- scale cybersecurity incidents and crises; (b) to develop a shared situational awareness for large-scale cyberse­ curity incidents and crises; (c) to assess the consequences and impact of relevant large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises and propose possible mitigation measures; (d) to coordinate the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises and support decision-making at political level in relation to such incidents and crises; (e) to discuss, upon the request of a Member State concerned, national large-scale cybersecurity incident and crisis response plans referred to in Article 9(4). 4. EU-CyCLONe shall adopt its rules of procedure. 5. EU-CyCLONe shall report on a regular basis to the Cooperation Group on the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises, as well as trends, focusing in particular on their impact on essential and important entities. ▼B --- PAGE 26 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 26 6. EU-CyCLONe shall cooperate with the CSIRTs network on the basis of agreed procedural arrangements provided for in Article 15(6). 7. By 17 July 2024 and every 18 months thereafter, EU-CyCLONe shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report assessing its work. Article 17 International cooperation The Union may, where appropriate, conclude international agreements, in accordance with Article 218 TFEU, with third countries or inter­ national organisations, allowing and organising their participation in particular activities of the Cooperation Group, the CSIRTs network and EU-CyCLONe. Such agreements shall comply with Union data protection law. Article 18 Report on the state of cybersecurity in the Union 1. ENISA shall adopt, in cooperation with the Commission and the Cooperation Group, a biennial report on the state of cybersecurity in the Union and shall submit and present