referred to in Article 9(4). 4. EU-CyCLONe shall adopt its rules of procedure. 5. EU-CyCLONe shall report on a regular basis to the Cooperation Group on the management of large-scale cybersecurity incidents and crises, as well as trends, focusing in particular on their impact on essential and important entities. ▼B --- PAGE 26 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 26 6. EU-CyCLONe shall cooperate with the CSIRTs network on the basis of agreed procedural arrangements provided for in Article 15(6). 7. By 17 July 2024 and every 18 months thereafter, EU-CyCLONe shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report assessing its work. Article 17 International cooperation The Union may, where appropriate, conclude international agreements, in accordance with Article 218 TFEU, with third countries or inter­ national organisations, allowing and organising their participation in particular activities of the Cooperation Group, the CSIRTs network and EU-CyCLONe. Such agreements shall comply with Union data protection law. Article 18 Report on the state of cybersecurity in the Union 1. ENISA shall adopt, in cooperation with the Commission and the Cooperation Group, a biennial report on the state of cybersecurity in the Union and shall submit and present that report to the European Parliament. The report shall, inter alia, be made available in machine- readable data and include the following: (a) a Union-level cybersecurity risk assessment, taking account of the cyber threat landscape; (b) an assessment of the development of cybersecurity capabilities in the public and private sectors across the Union; (c) an assessment of the general level of cybersecurity awareness and cyber hygiene among citizens and entities, including small and medium-sized enterprises; (d) an aggregated assessment of the outcome of the peer reviews referred to in Article 19; (e) an aggregated assessment of the level of maturity of cybersecurity capabilities and resources across the Union, including those at sector level, as well as of the extent to which the Member States’ national cybersecurity strategies are aligned. 2. The report shall include particular policy recommendations, with a view to addressing shortcomings and increasing the level of cyberse­ curity across the Union, and a summary of the findings for the particular period from the EU Cybersecurity Technical Situation Reports on incidents and cyber threats prepared by ENISA in accordance with Article 7(6) of Regulation (EU) 2019/881. 3. ENISA, in cooperation with the Commission, the Cooperation Group and the CSIRTs network, shall develop the methodology, including the relevant variables, such as quantitative and qualitative indicators, of the aggregated assessment referred to in paragraph 1, point (e). ▼B --- PAGE 27 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 27 Article 19 Peer reviews 1. ►C1 The Cooperation Group shall, by 17 January 2025, establish, with the assistance ◄ of the Commission and ENISA, and, where relevant, the CSIRTs network, the methodology and organisa­ tional aspects of peer reviews with a view to learning from shared experiences, strengthening mutual trust, achieving a high common level of cybersecurity, as well as enhancing Member States’ cyberse­ curity capabilities and policies necessary to implement this Directive. Participation in peer reviews is voluntary. The peer reviews shall be carried out by cybersecurity experts. The cybersecurity experts shall be designated by at least two Member States, different from the Member State being reviewed. The peer reviews shall cover at least one of the following: (a) the level of implementation of the cybersecurity risk-management measures and reporting obligations laid down in Articles 21 and 23; (b) the level of capabilities, including the available financial, technical and human resources, and the effectiveness of the exercise of the tasks of the competent authorities; (c) the operational capabilities of the CSIRTs; (d) the level of implementation of mutual assistance referred to in Article 37; (e) the level of implementation of the cybersecurity information-sharing arrangements referred to in Article 29; (f) specific issues of cross-border or cross-sector nature. 2. The methodology referred to in paragraph 1 shall include objective, non-discriminatory, fair and transparent criteria on the basis of which the Member States designate cybersecurity experts eligible to carry out the peer reviews. The Commission and ENISA shall participate as observers in the peer reviews. 3. Member States may identify specific issues as referred to in paragraph 1, point (f), for the purposes of a peer review. 4. Before commencing a peer review as referred to in paragraph 1, Member States shall notify the participating Member States of its scope, including the specific issues identified pursuant to paragraph 3. 5. Prior to the commencement of the peer review, Member States may carry out a self-assessment of the reviewed aspects and provide that self-assessment to the designated cybersecurity experts. The Coop­ eration Group shall, with the assistance of the Commission and ENISA, lay down the methodology for the Member States’ self-assessment. ▼B --- PAGE 28 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 28 6. Peer reviews shall entail physical or virtual on-site visits and off- site exchanges of information. In line with the principle of good cooper­ ation, the Member State subject to the peer review shall provide the designated cybersecurity experts with the information necessary for the assessment, without prejudice to Union or national law concerning the protection of confidential or classified information and to the safe­ guarding of essential State functions, such as national security. The Cooperation Group, in cooperation with the Commission and ENISA, shall develop appropriate codes of conduct underpinning the working methods of designated cybersecurity experts. Any information obtained through the peer review shall be used solely for that purpose. The cybersecurity experts participating in the peer review shall not disclose any sensitive or confidential information obtained in the course of that peer review to any third parties. 7. Once subject to a peer review, the same aspects reviewed in a Member State shall not be subject to a further peer review in that Member State for two years following the conclusion of the peer review, unless otherwise requested by the Member State or agreed upon after a proposal of the Cooperation Group. 8. Member States shall ensure that any risk of conflict of interest concerning the designated cybersecurity experts is revealed to the other Member States, the Cooperation Group, the Commission and ENISA, before the commencement of the peer review. The Member State subject to the peer review may object to the designation of particular cybersecurity experts on duly substantiated grounds communicated to the designating Member State. 9. Cybersecurity experts participating in peer reviews shall draft reports on the findings and conclusions of the peer reviews. Member States subject to a peer review may provide comments on the draft reports concerning them and such comments shall be attached to the reports. The reports shall include recommendations to enable improvement on the aspects covered by the peer review. The reports shall be submitted to the Cooperation Group and the CSIRTs network where relevant. A Member State subject to the peer review may decide to make its report, or a redacted version of it, publicly available. CHAPTER IV CYBERSECURITY RISK-MANAGEMENT MEASURES AND REPORTING OBLIGATIONS Article 20 Governance 1. Member States shall ensure that the management bodies of essential and important entities approve the cybersecurity risk- management measures taken by those entities in order to comply with Article 21, oversee its implementation and can be held liable for infringements by the entities of that Article. The application of this paragraph shall be without prejudice to national law as regards the liability rules applicable to public institutions, as well as the liability of public servants and elected or appointed officials. ▼B --- PAGE 29 --- 02022L2555 — EN — 27.12.2022 — 000.004 — 29 2. Member States shall ensure that the members of the management bodies of essential and important entities are required to follow training, and shall encourage essential and important entities to offer similar training to their employees on a regular basis, in order that they gain sufficient knowledge and skills to enable them to identify risks and assess cybersecurity risk-management practices and their impact on the services provided by the entity. Article 21 Cybersecurity risk-management measures 1. Member States shall ensure that essential and important entities take appropriate and proportionate technical, operational and organisa­ tional measures to manage the risks posed to the security of network and information systems which those entities use for their operations or for the provision of their services, and to prevent or minimise the impact of incidents on recipients of their services and on other services. Taking into account the state-of-the-art and, where applicable, relevant European and international standards, as well as the cost of implemen­ tation, the measures referred to in the first subparagraph shall ensure a level of security of network and information systems appropriate to the risks posed. When assessing the proportionality of those measures, due account shall be taken of the degree of the entity’s exposure to risks, the entity’s size and the likelihood of occurrence of incidents and their severity, including their societal and economic