23 For secure web application development see also: https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Main_Page . --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted - after public consultation INTERNAL HUMAN RISK SOURCE 71. The role of human error in personal data breaches has to be highlighted, due to its common appearance. Since these types of breaches can be both intentional and unintentional, it is very hard for the data controllers to identify the vulnerabilities and adopt measures to avoid them. The International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners recognized the importance of addressing such human factors and adopted the resolution to address the role of human error in personal data breaches in October 201924. This resolution stresses that appropriate safeguarding measures should be taken to prevent human errors and provides a non-exhaustive list of such safeguards and approaches. 4.1 CASE No. 08: Exfiltration of business data by an employee 4.1.1 CASE No. 08 - Prior measures and risk assessment 72. In this particular case no prior measures were taken to prevent the employee from copying contact information of the company’s clientele, since he needed – and had – legitimate access to this information for his job tasks. Since fulfilling most customer relation jobs require some kind of employee access to personal data, these data breaches may be the most difficult to prevent. Limitations to the scope of access may limit the work the given employee is able to do. However, well thought out access policies and constant control can help prevent such breaches. 73. As usual, during risk assessment the type of the breach and the nature, sensitivity, and volume of personal data affected are to be taken into consideration. These kinds of breaches are typically breaches of confidentiality, since the database is usually left intact, its content “merely” copied for further use. The quantity of data affected is usually also low or medium. In this particular case no special categories of personal data were affected, the employee only needed the contact information of clients to enable him to get in touch with them after leaving the company. Therefore, the data concerned is not sensitive. 74. Although the only goal of the ex-employee that maliciously copied the data may be limited to gaining the contact information of the company’s clientele for his own commercial purposes, the controller is not in a position to consider the risk for the affected data subjects to be low, since the controller does not have any kind of reassurance on the intentions of the employee. Thus, while the consequences of the breach might be limited to the exposure to uncalled-for self-marketing of the ex-employee, further and more grave abuse of the stolen data is not ruled out, depending on the purpose of the processing put in place by the ex- employee25. 24 http://globalprivacyassembly.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/AOIC-Resolution-FINAL-ADOPTED.pdf 25 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. During his period of notice, the employee of a company copies business data from the company’s database. The employee is authorized to access the data only to fulfill his job tasks. Months later, after quitting the job, he uses the data thus gained (basic contact data) to feed a new data processing for which he is the controller in order to contact the clients of the company to entice them to his new business. --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted - after public consultation 4.1.2 CASE No. 08 – Mitigation and obligations 75. The mitigation of the adverse effects of the breach in the above case is difficult. It might need to involve immediate legal action to prevent the former employee from abusing and disseminating the data any further. As a next step, the avoidance of similar future situations should be the goal. The controller might try to order the ex-employee to stop using the data, but the success of this action is dubious at best. Appropriate technical measures such as the impossibility of copying or downloading data to removable devices may help. 76. There is no “one-size fits-all” solution to these kinds of cases, but a systematic approach may help to prevent them. For example, the company may consider – when possible - withdrawing certain forms of access from employees who have signalled their intention to quit or implementing access logs so that unwanted access can be logged and flagged. The contract signed with employees should include clauses that prohibit such actions. 77. All in all, as the given breach will not result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, a notification to the SA will suffice. However, the information to the data subjects might be beneficial for the data controller too, since it might be better that they hear from the company about the data leak rather than from the ex-employee who tries to contact them. Data breach documentation in accordance with Article 33 (5) is a legal obligation. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects   X --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted - after public consultation 4.2 CASE No. 09: Accidental transmission of data to a trusted third party 4.2.1 CASE No. 09 – Prior measures and risk assessment 78. Here the breach does not derive from an intentional action of an employee, but from an unintentional human error caused by inattentiveness. These kinds of breaches may be avoided or decreased in frequency by a) enforcing training, education and awareness programs where employees gain a better understanding of the importance of personal data protection, b) reducing file exchange through e-mail, instead using dedicated systems for processing customer data for example, c) double checking files before sending, d) separating the creation and sending of files. 79. This data breach concerns only the confidentiality of the data, and the integrity and the accessibility thereof are left intact. The data breach only concerned about two dozen costumers, hence the quantity of data affected can be considered as low. Furthermore, the personal data affected does not contain any sensitive data. The fact that the data processor immediately contacted the data controller after becoming aware of the data breach can be considered a risk mitigating factor. (The possibility of data having been sent to other insurance agents should also be evaluated and, if confirmed, proper measures should be taken.) Due to the appropriate steps taken after the data breach, it will probably not have any impact on the data subjects’ rights and freedoms. 80. The combination of the low number of individuals affected, the immediate detection of the breach and the measures taken to have its effects minimized make this particular case no risk. 4.2.2 CASE No. 09 – Mitigation and obligations 81. Moreover, other risk mitigating circumstances are at play as well: the agent is bound by professional secrecy; he himself reported the problem to the controller; and he deleted the file upon request. Raising awareness and possibly including additional steps in checking documents involving personal data will probably help avoid similar cases in the future. 82. Besides documenting the breach in accordance with Article 33 (5), there is no need for any other action. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 4.3 Organizational and technical measures for preventing / mitigating the impacts of internal human risk sources 83. A combination of the below mentioned measures – applied depending on the unique features of the case – should help to lower the chance of a similar breach reoccurring. An insurance agent noticed that – made possible by the faulty settings of an Excel file received by e-mail – he was able to access information related to two dozen customers not belonging to his scope. He is bound by professional secrecy and was the sole recipient of the e-mail. The arrangement between the data controller and the insurance agent obliges the agent to signal a personal data breach without undue delay to the data controller. Therefore, the agent instantly signalled the mistake to the controller, who corrected the file and sent it out again, asking the agent to delete the former message. According to the above-mentioned arrangement the agent has to confirm the deletion in a written statement, which he did. The information gained includes no special categories of personal data, only contact data and data about the insurance itself (insurance type, amount). After analysing the personal data affected by the breach the data controller did not identify any special characteristics on the side of the individuals or the data controller that may affect the level of impact of the breach. --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted - after public consultation 84. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Periodic implementation of training, education and awareness programs for employees on