or social disadvantage to those individuals. One of the most important obligation of the data controller is to evaluate these risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects and to implement appropriate technical and organizational measures to address them. 7. Accordingly, the GDPR requires the controller to:  document any personal data breaches, comprising the facts relating to the personal data breach, its effects and the remedial action taken6;  notify the personal data breach to the supervisory authority, unless the data breach is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons7;  communicate the personal data breach to the data subject when the personal data breach is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons8. 8. Data breaches are problems in and of themselves, but they may be also symptoms of a vulnerable, possibly outdated data security regime, they may also indicate system weaknesses to be addressed. As a general truth, it is always better to prevent data breaches by preparing in advance, since several consequences of them are by nature irreversible. Before a controller can fully assess the risk arising from a breach caused by some form of attack, the root cause of the issue should be identified, in order to identify whether any vulnerabilities that gave rise to the incident are still present, and are still therefore exploitable. In many cases the controller is able to identify that the incident is likely to result in a risk, and is therefore to be 4 G29 WP213, 25 March 2014, Opinion 03/2014 on Personal Data Breach Notification, p. 5, https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/index_en.htm#maincontentSec4 . 5 See Guidelines WP 250, p. 7. - It must be taken into consideration that a data breach can concern either one category or more categories simultaneously or combined. 6 GDPR Article 33(5). 7GDPR Article 33(1). 8GDPR Article 34(1). --- PAGE 7 --- Adopted - after public consultation notified. In other cases the notification does not need to be postponed until the risk and impact surrounding the breach has been fully assessed, since the full risk assessment can happen in parallel to notification, and the information thus gained may be provided to the SA in phases without undue further delay9. 9. The breach should be notified when the controller is of the opinion that it is likely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subject. Controllers should make this assessment at the time they become aware of the breach. The controller should not wait for a detailed forensic examination and (early) mitigation steps before assessing whether or not the data breach is likely to result in a risk and thus should be notified. 10. If a controller self-assesses the risk to be unlikely, but it turns out that the risk materializes, the competent SA can use its corrective powers and may resolve to sanctions 11. Every controller and processor should have plans, procedures in place for handling eventual data breaches. Organisations should have clear reporting lines and persons responsible for certain aspects of the recovery process 12. Training and awareness on data protection issues for the staff of the controller and processor focusing on personal data breach management (identification of a personal data breach incident and further actions to be taken, etc.) is also essential for the controllers and processors. This training should be regularly repeated, depending on the type of the processing activity and size of the controller, addressing latest trends and alerts coming from cyberattacks or other security incidents. 13. The principle of accountability and the concept of data protection by design could incorporate analysis that feeds into a data controller’s and data processor’s own “Handbook on Handling Personal Data Breach” that aims to establish facts for each facet of the processing at each major stage of the operation. Such a handbook prepared in advance would provide a much quicker source of information to allow data controllers and data processors to mitigate the risks and meet the obligations without undue delay. This would ensure that if a personal data breach was to occur, people in the organisation would know what to do, and the incident would more than likely be handled quicker than if there were no mitigations or plan in place. 14. Though the cases presented below are fictitious, they are based on typical cases from the SA’s collective experience with data breach notifications. The analyses offered relate explicitly to the cases under scrutiny, but with the goal to provide assistance for data controllers in assessing their own data breaches. Any modification in the circumstances of the cases described below may result in different or more significant levels of risk, thus requiring different or additional measures. These guidelines structure the cases according to certain categories of breaches (e.g. ransomware attacks). Certain mitigating measures are called for in each case when dealing with a certain category of breaches. These measures are not necessarily repeated in each case analysis belonging to the same category of breaches. For the cases belonging to the same category only the differences are laid out. Therefore, the reader should read all cases relevant to relevant category of a breach to identify and distinguish all the correct measures to be taken. 15. The internal documentation of a breach is an obligation independent of the risks pertaining to the breach, and must be performed in each and every case. The cases presented below try to shed some light on whether or not to notify the breach to the SA and communicate it to the data subjects affected. 9GDPR Article 33(4). --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted - after public consultation RANSOMWARE 16. A frequent cause for a data breach notification is a ransomware attack suffered by the data controller. In these cases a malicious code encrypts the personal data, and subsequently the attacker asks the controller for a ransom in exchange for the decryption code. This kind of attack can usually be classified as a breach of availability, but often also a breach of confidentiality could occur. 2.1 CASE No. 01: Ransomware with proper backup and without exfiltration 17. In this case, the following elements were realized from the definition of a ‘personal data breach’: a breach of security led to unlawful alteration and unauthorized access to personal data stored. 2.1.1 CASE No. 01 - Prior measures and risk assessment 18. As with all risks posed by external actors, the likelihood that a ransomware attack is successful can be drastically reduced by tightening the security of the data controlling environment. The majority of these breaches can be prevented by ensuring that appropriate organizational, physical and technological security measures have been taken. Examples of such measures are proper patch management and the use of an appropriate anti-malware detection system. Having a proper and separate backup will help to mitigate the consequences of a successful attack should it occur. Moreover, an employee security education, training, and awareness (SETA) program, will help to prevent and recognise this kind of attack. (A list of advisable measures can be found in section 2.5.) Among those measures, a proper patch management that ensures that the systems are up to date and all known vulnerabilities of the deployed systems are fixed is one of the most important since most of the ransomware attacks exploit well known vulnerabilities. 19. When assessing the risks, the controller should investigate the breach and identify the type of the malicious code to understand the possible consequences of the attack. Among those risks to be considered is the risk that data was exfiltrated without leaving a trace in the logs of the systems. 20. In this example, the attacker had access to personal data and the confidentiality of cipher text containing personal data in encrypted form was compromised. However, any data that might have been exfiltrated cannot be read or used by the perpetrator, at least for the time being. The encryption technique used by the data controller conforms to the state-of-the-art. The decryption key was not compromised and presumably could also not be determined by other means. In consequence, the confidentiality risks to the Computer systems of a small manufacturing company were exposed to a ransomware attack, and data stored in those systems was encrypted. The data controller used encryption at rest, so all data accessed by the ransomware was stored in encrypted form using a state-of-the-art encryption algorithm. The decryption key was not compromised in the attack, i.e. the attacker could neither access it nor use it indirectly. In consequence, the attacker only had access to encrypted personal data. In particular, neither the email system of the company, nor any client systems used to access it were affected. The company is using the expertise of an external cybersecurity company to investigate the incident. Logs tracing all data flows leaving the company (including outbound email) are available. After analysing the logs and the data collected by the detection systems the company has deployed, an internal investigation supported