detection systems have collected the internal investigation aided by the cybersecurity company determined that the perpetrator only encrypted the data without exfiltrating it. The logs show no outward data flow in the timeframe of the attack. The personal data affected by the breach relates to the employees and patients, which represented thousands of individuals. Backups were available in an electronic form. Most of the data was restored but this operation lasted 2 working days and led to major delays in treating the patients with surgery cancelled / postponed, and to a lowering the level of service due to the unavailability of the systems. --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted - after public consultation 40. This case serves as an example for a ransomware attack with high risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. It should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5), notified to the SA in accordance with Article 33 (1) and communicated to the data subjects in accordance with Article 34 (1). The organisation also needs to update and remediate its organizational and technical personal data security handling and risk mitigation measures and procedures. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    2.4 CASE No. 04: Ransomware without backup and with exfiltration 2.4.1 CASE No. 04 - Prior measures and risk assessment 41. The data controller should have adopted the same prior measures as mentioned in part 2.1. and in section 2.5. Though backup was in place, it was also affected by the attack. This arrangement alone raises questions about the quality of the controller’s prior IT security measures and should be further scrutinised during the investigation, since in a well-designed backup regime, multiple backups must be securely stored without access from the main system, otherwise they could be compromised in the same attack. Furthermore, ransomware attacks may lie undiscovered for days slowly encrypting rarely used data. This can render multiple backups useless, so backups should also be taken periodically and be isolated. This would increase the likelihood of recovery albeit with increased loss data. 42. This breach concerns not only data availability, but confidentiality as well, since the attacker may have modified and / or copied data from the server. Therefore, the type of the breach results in high risk17. 43. The nature, sensitivity, and volume of personal data increases the risks further, because the number of individuals affected is high, as is the overall quantity of affected personal data. Beyond basic identity data, identity documents and financial data such as credit card details are involved too. A data breach concerning these types of data presents high risk in and of themselves, and if processed together, they could be used for – among others - identity theft or fraud. 44. Due to either faulty server logic or organizational controls, the backup files were affected by the ransomware, preventing the restore of data and enhancing the risk. 17 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. The server of a public transportation company was exposed to a ransomware attack and its data was encrypted by the attacker. According to the findings of the internal investigation the perpetrator not only encrypted the data, but also exfiltrated it. The type of breached data was the personal data of clients and employees, and of the several thousand people using the services of the company (e.g. buying tickets online). Beyond basic identity data, identity card numbers and financial data such as credit card details are involved in the breach. A backup database existed, but it was also encrypted by the attacker. --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted - after public consultation 45. This data breach presents a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, because it could likely lead to both material (e.g. financial loss since credit card details were affected) and non-material damage (e.g. identity theft or fraud since identity card details were affected). 2.4.2 CASE No. 04 – Mitigation and obligations 46. Communication to the data subjects is essential, so they can make the necessary steps to avoid material damage (e.g. block their credit cards). 47. Aside from documenting the breach in accordance with Article 33 (5), a notification to the SA is also mandatory in this case (Article 33 (1)) and the controller is also obliged to communicate the breach to the data subjects (Article 34 (1)). The latter could be undertaken on a person-by-person basis, but for individuals where contact data is not available the controller should do so publicly, provided that such communication would not be susceptible to trigger additional negative consequences on the data subjects, e.g. by way of a notification on its website. In the latter case a precise and clear communication is required, in plain sight on the homepage of the controller, with exact references of the relevant GDPR provisions. The organisation may also need to update and remediate its organizational and technical personal data security handling and risk mitigation measures and procedures. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    2.5 Organizational and technical measures for preventing / mitigating the impacts of ransomware attacks 48. The fact that a ransomware attack could have taken place is usually a sign of one or more vulnerabilities in the controller’s system. This also applies in ransomware cases in which the personal data has been encrypted, but has not been exfiltrated. Regardless of the outcome and the consequences of the attack, the importance of an all-encompassing evaluation of the data security system - with particular emphasis on IT security - cannot be stressed enough. The identified weaknesses and security holes are to be documented and addressed without delay. 49. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Keeping the firmware, operating system and application software on the servers, client machines, active network components, and any other machines on the same LAN (including Wi-Fi devices) up to date. Ensuring that appropriate IT security measures are in place, making sure they are effective and keeping them regularly updated when processing or circumstances change or evolve. This includes keeping detailed logs of which patches are applied at which timestamp.  Designing and organising processing systems and infrastructure to segment or isolate data systems and networks to avoid propagation of malware within the organisation and to external systems.  The existence of an up-to-date, secure and tested backup procedure. Media for medium- and long-term back-up should be kept separate from operational data storage and out of reach of third parties even in case of a successful attack (such as daily incremental backup and weekly full backup).  Having / obtaining an appropriate, up-to-date, effective and integrated anti-malware software. --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted - after public consultation  Having an appropriate, up-to-date, effective and integrated firewall and intrusion detection and prevention system. Directing network traffic through the firewall/intrusion detection, even in the case of home office or mobile work (e.g. by using VPN connections to organizational security mechanisms when accessing the internet).  Training employees on the methods of recognising and preventing IT attacks. The controller should provide means to establish whether emails and messages obtained by other means of communication are authentic and trustworthy. Employees should be trained to recognize when such an attack has realized, how to take the endpoint out of the network and their obligation to immediately report it to the security officer.  Emphasize the need of identifying the type of the malicious code to see the consequences of the attack and be able to find the right measures to mitigate the risk. In case a ransomware attack has succeeded and there is no back-up available, tools available such as the ones by the “no more ransom” (nomoreransom.org) project may be applied to retrieve data. However, in case a safe backup is available, restoring the data from it is advisable.  Forwarding or replication all logs to a central log server (possibly including the signing or cryptographic time-stamping of log entries).  Strong encryption and multi factor authentication, in particular for administrative access to IT systems, appropriate key and password management.  Vulnerability and penetration testing on a regular basis.  Establish a Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) or Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) within the organization, or join a collective CSIRT/CERT. Create an Incident Response Plan, Disaster Recovery Plan and a Business Continuity Plan, and make sure that these are thoroughly tested.  When assessing countermeasures – risk analysis should be reviewed, tested and updated. DATA EXFILTRATION ATTACKS 50. Attacks that exploit vulnerabilities in services offered by the controller to third parties over the internet, e.g. committed by way of injection