code to see the consequences of the attack and be able to find the right measures to mitigate the risk. In case a ransomware attack has succeeded and there is no back-up available, tools available such as the ones by the “no more ransom” (nomoreransom.org) project may be applied to retrieve data. However, in case a safe backup is available, restoring the data from it is advisable.  Forwarding or replication all logs to a central log server (possibly including the signing or cryptographic time-stamping of log entries).  Strong encryption and multi factor authentication, in particular for administrative access to IT systems, appropriate key and password management.  Vulnerability and penetration testing on a regular basis.  Establish a Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) or Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) within the organization, or join a collective CSIRT/CERT. Create an Incident Response Plan, Disaster Recovery Plan and a Business Continuity Plan, and make sure that these are thoroughly tested.  When assessing countermeasures – risk analysis should be reviewed, tested and updated. DATA EXFILTRATION ATTACKS 50. Attacks that exploit vulnerabilities in services offered by the controller to third parties over the internet, e.g. committed by way of injection attacks (e.g. SQL injection, path traversal), website compromising and similar methods, may resemble ransomware attacks in that the risk emanates from the action of an unauthorized third party, but those attacks typically aim at copying, exfiltrating and abusing personal data for some malicious end. Hence, they are mainly breaches of confidentiality and, possibly, also data integrity. At the same time, if the controller is aware of the characteristics of this kind of breaches, there are many measures available to controllers that can substantially reduce the risk of a successful execution of an attack. 3.1 CASE No. 05: Exfiltration of job application data from a website 3.1.1 CASE No. 05 - Prior measures and risk assessment 51. The security of the data controller’s environment is extremely important, as the majority of these breaches can be prevented by ensuring that all systems are constantly updated, sensitive data is encrypted and An employment agency was the victim of a cyber-attack, which placed a malicious code on its website. This malicious code made personal information submitted through online job application forms and stored on the webserver accessible to unauthorized person(s). 213 such forms are possibly affected, after analysing the affected data it was determined that no special categories of data were affected in the breach. The particular malware toolkit installed had functionalities that allowed the attacker to remove any history of exfiltration and also allowed processing on the server to be monitored and to have personal data captured. The toolkit was discovered only a month after its installation. --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted - after public consultation applications are developed according to high security standards like strong authentication, measures against brute force, attacks, “escaping” or “sanitising”18 user inputs, etc. Periodic IT security audits, vulnerability assessments and penetration tests are also required in order to detect these kinds of vulnerabilities in advance and fix them. In this particular case, file integrity monitoring tools in production environment might have helped to detect the code injection. (A list of advisable measures is to be found in section 3.7). 52. The controller should always start to investigate the breach by identifying the type of the attack and its methods, in order to assess what measures are to be taken. To make it fast and efficient, the data controller should have an incident response plan in place which specifies the swift and necessary steps to take control over the incident. In this particular case, the type of the breach was a risk enhancing factor since not only was data confidentiality curtailed, the infiltrator also had the means to establish changes in the system, so data integrity also became questionable. 53. The nature, sensitivity and volume of personal data affected in the breach should be assessed to determine to what extent the breach affected the data subjects. Though no special categories of personal data were affected, the accessed data contains considerable information about the individuals from the online forms, and such data could be misused in a number of ways (targeting with unsolicited marketing, identity theft, etc.), so the severity of the consequences should increase the risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects19. 3.1.2 CASE No. 05 – Mitigation and obligations 54. If possible, after solving the problem, the database should be compared with the one stored in a secure backup. The experiences drawn from the breach should be utilized in updating the IT infrastructure. The data controller should return all affected IT systems to a known clean state, remedy the vulnerability and implement new security measures to avoid similar data breaches in the future, e.g. file integrity checks and security audits. If personal data was not only exfiltrated, but also deleted, the controller has to take systematic action to recover the personal data in the state it was in before the breach. It may be necessary to apply full backups, incremental changes and then possibly rerun the processing since the last incremental backup – which requires that the controller is able to replicate the changes made since the last backup. This could require that the controller has the system designed to retain the daily input files in case they need to be processed again and requires a robust method of storage and a suitable retention policy. 55. In light of the above, as the breach is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the data subjects should definitely be informed about it (Article 34(1)), which of course means that the relevant SA(s) should also be involved in the form of a data breach notification. Documenting the breach is obligatory according to Article 33 (5) GDPR and makes the assessment of the situation easier. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    18 Escaping or sanitizing user inputs is a form of input validation, which ensures that only properly formatted data is entered into an information system. 19 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted - after public consultation 3.2 CASE No. 06: Exfiltration of hashed password from a website 3.2.1 CASE No. 06 - Prior measures and risk assessment 56. In this particular case data confidentiality is compromised, but the passwords in the database were hashed with an up-to-date method, which would decrease the risk regarding the nature, sensitivity, and volume of personal data. This case presents no risks to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. 57. Furthermore, no contact information (e.g. e-mail addresses or phone numbers) of data subjects was compromised, which means there is no significant risk for the data subjects of being targeted by fraud attempts (e.g. receiving phishing e-mails or fraudulent text messages and phone calls). No special categories of personal data were involved. 58. Some user names could be regarded as personal data, but the subject of the website does not allow for negative connotations. Although it has to be noted that the risk assessment may change20, if the type of the website and the data accessed could reveal special categories of personal data (e. g. website of a political party or trade union). Using state of the art encryption could mitigate the adverse effects of the breach. Assuring that a limited number of attempts to login is allowed will prevent brute force login attacks to be successful, thus reducing largely the risks imposed by attackers already knowing the usernames. 3.2.2 CASE No. 06 – Mitigation and obligations 59. The communication to the data subjects in some cases could be considered a mitigating factor, since the data subjects are also in a position to make the necessary steps to avoid further damages from the breach, for example by changing their password. In this case, notification was not mandatory, but in many cases it can be considered a good practice. 60. The data controller should correct the vulnerability and implement new security measures to avoid similar data breaches in the future like, for example, systematic security audits to the website. 61. The breach should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5) but no notification or communication needed. 62. Also, it is strongly advisable to communicate a breach involving passwords to data subjects in any case even when the passwords were stored using a salted hash with an algorithm conforming to the state-of-the-art. The use of authentication methods obviating the need to process passwords on the server side is preferable. Data subjects should be given the choice to take appropriate measures regarding their own passwords. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 20 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote