applied depending on the unique features of the case - should help to lower the chance of a similar breach reoccurring. 123. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Setting exact standards – with no room for interpretation - for sending letters / e-mails.  Adequate training for personnel on how to send letters / e-mails.  When sending e-mails to multiple recipients, they are listed in the ’bcc’ field by default.  Extra confirmation is required when sending e-mails to multiple recipients, and they are not listed in the ’bcc’ field.  Application of the four-eyes principle.  Automatic addressing instead of manual, with data extracted from an available and up-to-date database; the automatic addressing system should be regularly reviewed to check for hidden errors and incorrect settings.  Application of message delay (e.g. the message can be deleted / edited within a certain time period after clicking the press button).  Disabling autocomplete when typing in e-mail addresses.  Awareness sessions on most common mistakes leading to a personal data breach.  Training sessions and manuals on how to handle incidents leading to a personal data breach and who to inform (involve DPO). --- PAGE 31 --- Adopted - after public consultation OTHER CASES – SOCIAL ENGINEERING 7.1 CASE No. 17: Identity theft 7.1.1 CASE No. 17 - Risk assessment, mitigation and obligations 124. This case serves as an example on the importance of prior measures. The breach, from a risk aspect, presents a high level of risk33, as billing data can give information about the data subject’s private life (e.g. habits, contacts) and could lead to material damage (e.g. stalking, risk to physical integrity). The personal data obtained during this attack can also be used in order to facilitate account takeover in this organisation or exploit further authentication measures in other organisations. Considering these risks, the “appropriate” authentication measure should meet a high bar, depending on what personal data can be processed as a result of authentication. 125. As a result, both a notification to the SA and a communication to the data subject are needed from the controller. 126. The prior client validation process is clearly to be refined in light of this case. The methods used for authentication were not sufficient. The malicious party was able to pretend to be the intended user by the use of publicly available information and information that they otherwise had access to. 127. The use of this type of static knowledge-based authentication (where the answer does not change, and where the information is not “secret” such as would be the case with a password) is not recommended. 128. Instead, the organisation should use a form of authentication which would result in a high degree of confidence that the authenticated user is the intended person, and not anyone else. The introduction of an out-of-band multi-factor authentication method would solve the problem, e.g. to verify the change demand, by sending a confirmation request to the former contact; or adding extra questions and requiring information only visible on the previous bills. It is the controller’s responsibility to decide which measures to introduce, as it knows the details and requirements of its internal operation the best. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    33 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. The contact centre of a telecommunication company receives a telephone call from someone that poses as a client. The supposed client demands the company to change the email address to which the billing information should be sent from there on. The worker of the contact centre validates the client’s identity by asking for certain personal data, as defined by the procedures of the company. The caller correctly indicates the requested client’s fiscal number and postal address (because he had access to these elements). After the validation, the operator makes the requested change and, from there on, the billing information is sent to the new email address. The procedure does not foresee any notification to the former email contact. The following month the legitimate client contacts the company, inquiring why he is not receiving billing to his email address, and denies any call from him demanding the change of the email contact. Later, the company realizes that the information has been sent to an illegitimate user and reverts the change. --- PAGE 32 --- Adopted - after public consultation 7.2 CASE No. 18: Email exfiltration 7.2.1 CASE No. 18 - Risk assessment, mitigation and obligations 129. Even if the attacker was probably not aiming at collecting personal data, since the breach could lead to both material (e.g. financial loss) and non-material damage (e.g. identity theft or fraud), or the data could be used to facilitate other attacks (e.g. phishing), the personal data breach is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons. Therefore the breach should be communicated to all 99 employees and not only to the 10 employees whose salary information was leaked. 130. After becoming aware of the breach, the controller forced a password change for the compromised accounts, blocked sending emails to the attacker’s email account, notified the service provider of the email used by the attacker regarding his or her actions, removed the rules set by the attacker and refined the alerts of the monitoring system in order to give an alert as soon as an automatic rule is created. Alternatively, the controller could remove the right for users to set forwarding rules, needing the IT service team to do it only on request or it could introduce a policy that users should check and report on the rules set on their accounts once per week or more often, in areas handling financial data. 131. The fact that a breach could happen and go undetected for so long and the fact that, in a longer time, social engineering could have been used for altering more data, highlighted significant problems in the controller’s IT security system. These should be addressed without delay, like emphasizing automation reviews and change controls, incident detection and response measures. Controllers handling sensitive data, financial information, etc. have a larger responsibility in terms of providing adequate data security. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    A hypermarket chain detected, 3 months after its configuration, that some email accounts had been altered and rules created so that every email containing certain expressions (e.g. “invoice”, “payment”, “bank wiring”, “credit card authentication”, “bank account details”) would be moved to an unused folder and also forwarded to an external email address. Also, by that time, a social engineering attack had already been performed, i.e., the attacker, posing as a supplier, had had that supplier bank account details altered into his own. Finally, by that time, several fake invoices had been sent that included the new bank account detail. The monitoring system of the email platform ended up giving an alert regarding the folders. The company was unable to detect how the attacker was able to gain access to the email accounts to begin with, but it supposed that an infected email was to blame for giving access to the group of users in charge of the payments. Due to the keyword-based forwarding of emails, the attacker received information on 99 employees: name and wage of a particular month regarding 89 data subjects; name, civil status, number of children, wage, work hours and remainder information on the salary receipt of 10 employees whose contracts were ended. The controller only notified the 10 employees belonging to the latter group.