a result of the breach the concerned data subjects may suffer identity fraud relying on the data available on the stolen device, so risk is considered to be high. 5.2.2 CASE No. 11 – Mitigation and obligations 97. Turning on device encryption and the use of strong password protection of the stored database could have prevented the data breach to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. 98. Due to these circumstances the notification of the SA is required, the notification of the concerned data subjects is also necessary. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    5.3 CASE No. 12: Stolen paper files with sensitive data 29 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. The electronic notebook device of an employee of a service provider company was stolen. The stolen notebook contained names, surnames, sex, addresses and date of births of more than 100000 customers. Due to the unavailability of the stolen device it was not possible to identify if other categories of personal data were also affected. The access to the notebook's hard drive was not protected by any password. Personal data could be restored from daily backups available. A paper log book was stolen from a drug addiction rehab facility. The book contained basic identity and health data of the patients admitted to the rehab facility. The data was only stored on paper and no backup was available to the doctors treating the patients. The book was not stored in a locked drawer or a room, the data controller had neither an access control regime nor any other safeguarding measure for the paper documentation. --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted - after public consultation 5.3.1 CASE No. 12 – Prior measures and risk assessment 99. No prior safety measures were taken by the data controller, hence the personal data stored in this book was easily accessible for the person who found it. Moreover, the nature of the personal data stored in the book makes the lack of backup data a very serious risk factor. 100. This case serves as an example for a high-risk data breach. Due to the failure of appropriate safety precautions, sensitive health data pursuant to Article 9 (1) GDPR was lost. Since in this case a special category of personal data was concerned, the potential risks to the concerned data subjects was increased, which should be also taken into consideration by the controller assessing the risk30. 101. This breach concerns the confidentiality, availability and integrity of the concerned personal data. As a result of the breach, medical secrecy is broken and unauthorized third parties may gain access to the patients’ private medical information, what may have severe impact on the patient’s personal life. The availability breach may also disturb the continuity of the patients’ treatment. Since the modification/deletion of parts of the book’s content may not be excluded, the integrity of the personal data is also compromised. 5.3.2 CASE No. 12 – Mitigation and obligations 102. During the assessment of the safeguarding measures the type of the supporting asset should be considered as well. Since the patient log book was a physical document, its safeguarding should have been organized differently than that of an electronic device. The pseudonymisation of the patients’ names, the storage of the book in a safeguarded premises and in a locked drawer or a room, and proper access control with authentication when accessing it could have prevented the data breach. 103. The above described data breach may severely impact the concerned data subjects; hence the notification of the SA and communication of the breach to the concerned data subjects is mandatory. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    5.4 Organizational and technical measures for preventing / mitigating the impacts of loss or theft of devices 104. A combination of the below mentioned measures – applied depending on the unique features of the case – should help to lower the chance of a similar breach reoccurring. 105. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Turn on device’s encryption (such as Bitlocker, Veracrypt or DM-Crypt).  Use passcode/password on all devices. Encrypt all mobile electronic devices in a way that requires the input of a complex password for decryption.  Use multi-factor authentication.  Turn on the functionalities of highly mobile devices that allow them to be located in case of loss or misplacement. 30 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. --- PAGE 27 --- Adopted - after public consultation  Use MDM (Mobile Devices Management) software/app and localization. Use anti-glare filters. Close down any unattended devices.  If possible and appropriate to the data processing in question, save personal data not on a mobile device, but on a central back-end server.  If the workstation is connected to the corporate LAN, do an automatic backup from the work folders provided it is unavoidable that personal data is stored there  Use a secure VPN (e.g. which requires a separate second factor authentication key for the establishment of a secure connection) to connect mobile devices to back-end servers.  Provide physical locks to employees in order to enable them to physically secure mobile devices they use while they remain unattended.  Proper regulation of device usage outside the company.  Proper regulation of device usage inside the company.  Use MDM (Mobile Devices Management) software/app and enable the remote wipe function.  Use centralised device management with minimum rights for the end users to install software.  Install physical access controls.  Avoid storing sensitive information in mobile devices or hard drives. If there is need to access the company’s internal system, secure channels should be used such as previously stated. MISPOSTAL 106. The risk source is an internal human error in this case as well, but here no malicious action led to the breach. It is the result of inattentiveness. Little can be undertaken by the controller after it happened, so prevention is even more important in these cases than in other breach types. 6.1 CASE No. 13: Postal mail mistake 6.1.1 CASE No. 13 - Prior measures and risk assessment 107. The bills contained the personal data required for a successful delivery (name, address, plus the item purchased and its price). It is important to identify how the human error could have happened in the first place, and if in any way, it could have been prevented. In the particular case describe the risk is low, since no special categories of personal data or other data whose abuse might lead to substantial negative effects were involved, the breach is not a result of a systemic error on the controller’s part and only two individuals are concerned. No negative effect on the individuals could be identified. 6.1.2 CASE No. 13 – Mitigation and obligations 108. The controller should provide for a free return of the items and the accompanying bills, and it also should request the wrong recipients to destroy / delete all eventual copies of the bills containing the other person’s personal data. 109. Even if the breach itself does not pose a high risk to rights and freedoms of the affected individuals, and thus communication to the data subjects is not mandated by Article 34 GDPR, communication of the breach to them cannot be avoided, as their cooperation is needed to mitigate the risk. Two orders for shoes were packed by a retail company. Due to human error two packing bills were mixed up with the result that both products and the relevant packing bills were sent to the wrong person. This means that the two customers got each other's orders, including the packing bills containing the personal data. After becoming aware of the breach the data controller recalled the orders and sent them to the right recipients. --- PAGE 28 --- Adopted - after public consultation Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 6.2 CASE No. 14: Highly confidential personal data sent by mail by mistake 6.2.1 CASE No. 14 - Prior measures and risk assessment 110. Stricter rules should have been implemented for sending such messages. The introduction of additional control mechanisms need to be considered. 111. The number of affected individuals is considerable, and the involvement of their social security number, along with other, more basic personal data, further increases the risk, which can be identified as high31. The eventual distribution of the data by any of the recipients cannot be contained by the controller. 6.2.2 CASE