arrangement between the data controller and the insurance agent obliges the agent to signal a personal data breach without undue delay to the data controller. Therefore, the agent instantly signalled the mistake to the controller, who corrected the file and sent it out again, asking the agent to delete the former message. According to the above-mentioned arrangement the agent has to confirm the deletion in a written statement, which he did. The information gained includes no special categories of personal data, only contact data and data about the insurance itself (insurance type, amount). After analysing the personal data affected by the breach the data controller did not identify any special characteristics on the side of the individuals or the data controller that may affect the level of impact of the breach. --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted - after public consultation 84. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Periodic implementation of training, education and awareness programs for employees on their privacy and security obligations and the detection and reporting of threats to the security of personal data26. Develop an awareness program to remind employees of the most commons errors leading to personal data breaches and how to avoid them.  Establishment of robust and effective data protection and privacy practices, procedures and systems27.  Evaluation of privacy practices, procedures and systems to ensure continued effectiveness28.  Making proper access control policies and forcing users to follow the rules.  Implementing techniques to force user authentication when accessing sensitive personal data.  Disabling the company related account of the user as soon as the person leaves the company.  Checking unusual dataflow between the file server and employee workstations.  Setting up I/O interface security in the BIOS or through the use of software controlling the use of computer interfaces (lock or unlock e. g. USB/CD/DVD etc.).  Reviewing employees’ access policy (e.g. logging access to sensitive data and requiring the user to input a business reason, so that this is available for audits).  Disabling open cloud services.  Forbidding and preventing access to known open mail services.  Disabling print screen function in OS.  Enforcing a clean desk policy.  Automated locking all computers after a certain amount of time of inactivity.  Use mechanisms (e.g. (wireless) token to log on/open locked accounts) for fast user switches in shared environments.  Use of dedicated systems for managing personal data that apply appropriate access control mechanisms and that prevent human mistake, such as sending of communications to the wrong subject. The use of spreadsheets and other office documents is not an appropriate means to manage client data. LOST OR STOLEN DEVICES AND PAPER DOCUMENTS 85. A frequent type of case is the loss or theft of portable devices. In these cases, the controller has to take into consideration the circumstances of the processing operation, such as the type of data stored on the device, as well as the supporting assets, and the measures taken prior to the breach to ensure an appropriate level of security. All of these elements affect the potential impacts of the data breach. The risk assessment might be difficult, as the device is no longer available. 26 Section 2) subsection (i) of the Resolution to address the role of human error in personal data breaches. 27 Section 2) subsection (ii) of the Resolution to address the role of human error in personal data breaches. 28Section 2) subsection (iii) of the Resolution to address the role of human error in personal data breaches. --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted - after public consultation 86. These kinds of breaches can be always classified as breaches of confidentiality. However, if there is no backup for the stolen database, then the breach type can also be breach of availability and breach of integrity. 87. The scenarios bellow demonstrate how the above mentioned circumstances influence the likelihood and severity of the data breach. 5.1 CASE No. 10: Stolen material storing encrypted personal data 5.1.1 CASE No. 10 - Prior measures and risk assessment 88. In this particular case the data controller took adequate measures to prevent and mitigate the impacts of a potential data breach by using device encryption, introducing adequate password protection and securing back-up of the data stored on the tablets. (A list of advisable measures is to be found in section 5.7). 89. After becoming aware of a breach, the data controller should assess the risk source, the systems supporting the data processing, the type of personal data involved and the potential impacts of the data breach on the concerned individuals. The data breach described above would have concerned confidentiality, availability and integrity of the concerned data, however due to the appropriate proceedings of the data controller prior and after the data breach none of these occurred. 5.1.2 CASE No. 10 – Mitigation and obligations 90. The confidentiality of the personal data on the devices was not compromised due to the strong password protection on both the tablets and the apps. The tablets were set up in such a way that setting a password also means that the data on the device is encrypted. This was further enhanced by the controller’s action to attempt to remotely wipe everything from the stolen devices. 91. Due to the measures taken, the confidentiality of the data was kept intact too. Furthermore, the backup ensured the continuous availability of the personal data, hence no potential negative impact could have occurred. 92. Due to these facts, the above described data breach was unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, hence no notification to the SA or the concerned data subjects was necessary. However, this data breach must also be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5). Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X During a break-in into a children’s day-care centre, two tablets were stolen. The tablets contained an app which held personal data about the children attending the day-care centre. Name, date of birth, personal data about the education of the children were concerned. Both the encrypted tablets which were turned off at the time of the break-in, and the app were protected by a strong password. Back-up data was effectively and readily available to the controller. After becoming aware of the break-in, the day-care remotely issued a command to wipe the tablets shortly after the discovery of the break-in. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted - after public consultation 5.2 CASE No. 11: Stolen material storing non-encrypted personal data 5.2.1 CASE No. 11 - Prior measures and risk assessment 93. No prior safety measures were taken by the data controller, hence the personal data stored on the stolen notebook was easily accessible for the thief or any other person coming into possession of the device thereafter. 94. This data breach concerns the confidentiality of the data stored on the stolen device. 95. The notebook containing the personal data was vulnerable in this case because it did not possess any password protection or encryption. The lack of basic security measures enhances the risk level for the affected data subjects. Furthermore, the identification of the concerned data subjects is also problematic, which also increases the severity of the breach. The considerable number of concerned individuals increases the risk, nevertheless, no special categories of personal data were concerned in the data breach. 96. During the risk assessment29 the controller should take into consideration the potential consequences and adverse effects of the confidentiality breach. As a result of the breach the concerned data subjects may suffer identity fraud relying on the data available on the stolen device, so risk is considered to be high. 5.2.2 CASE No. 11 – Mitigation and obligations 97. Turning on device encryption and the use of strong password protection of the stored database could have prevented the data breach to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. 98. Due to these circumstances the notification of the SA is required, the notification of the concerned data subjects is also necessary. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    5.3 CASE No. 12: Stolen paper files with sensitive data 29 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. The electronic notebook device of an employee of a service provider company was stolen. The stolen notebook contained names, surnames, sex, addresses and date of births of more than 100000 customers. Due to the unavailability of the stolen device it was not possible to identify if other categories of personal data were also affected. The access to the notebook's hard