attacker, the data controller cannot state that the absence of a log entry proves the absence of exfiltration, therefore the likelihood of a confidentiality breach cannot be entirely dismissed. 29. The data controller should assess the risks of this breach13 if the data was accessed by the attacker. During the risk assessment, the data controller should also take into consideration the nature, the sensitivity, the 13 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. One of the computers used by an agricultural company was exposed to a ransomware attack and its data was encrypted by the attacker. The company is using the expertise of an external cybersecurity company to monitor their network. Logs tracing all data flows leaving the company (including outbound email) are available. After analysing the logs and the data the other detection systems have collected the internal investigation aided by the cybersecurity company determined that the perpetrator only encrypted the data, without exfiltrating it. The logs show no outward data flow in the timeframe of the attack. The personal data affected by the breach relates to the employees and clients of the company, a few dozen individuals altogether. No special categories of data were affected. No backup was available in an electronic form. Most of the data was restored from paper backups. The restoration of the data took 5 working days and led to minor delays in the delivery of orders to customers. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted - after public consultation volume, and the context of personal data affected in the breach. In this case no special categories of personal data are affected, and the quantity of breached data and the number of affected data subjects is low. 30. Gathering exact information on the unauthorized access is key for determining the risk level and preventing a new or continued attack. If the data had been copied from the database, it would obviously have been a risk-increasing factor. When uncertain about the specifics of the illegitimate access, the worse scenario should be considered and the risk should be assessed accordingly. 31. The absence of a backup database can be considered a risk enhancing factor depending on the severity of consequences for the data subjects resulting from the lack of availability of the data. 2.2.2 CASE No. 02 – Mitigation and obligations 32. Without a backup few measures to remediate the loss of personal data can be undertaken by the controller, and the data has to be collected again, unless some other source is available (e.g. order confirmation e-mails). Without a backup, data may be lost and the severity will depend on the impact for the individuals. 33. The restoration of the data should not prove to be overly problematic14 if the data is still available on paper, but given the lack of an electronic backup database, a notification to the SA is considered necessary, as the restoration of the data took some time and could cause some delays in the orders’ delivery to customers and a considerable amount of meta-data (e.g. logs, time stamps) might not be retrievable. 34. Informing the data subjects about the breach may also depend on the length of time the personal data is unavailable and the difficulties it might cause in the operation of the controller as a result (e.g. delays in transferring employee’s payments). As these delays in payments and deliveries may lead to financial loss for the individuals whose data has been compromised, one could also argue the breach is likely to result in a high risk. Also, it might not be possible to avoid informing the data subjects if their contribution is needed for restoring the encrypted data. 35. This case serves as an example for a ransomware attack with risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, but not reaching high risk. It should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5) and notified to the SA in accordance with Article 33 (1). The organisation may also need (or be required by the SA) to update and remediate its organizational and technical personal data security handling and risk mitigation measures and procedures. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects   X 14 This will depend on the complexity and structure of the personal data. In the most complex scenarios, re-establishing data integrity, consistency with metadata, ensuring the correct relationships within data structures and checking data accuracy may take significant resources and effort. --- PAGE 12 --- Adopted - after public consultation 2.3 CASE No. 03: Ransomware with backup and without exfiltration in a hospital 2.3.1 CASE No. 03 - Prior measures and risk assessment 36. The data controller should have adopted the same prior measures as mentioned in part 2.1. and in section 2.5. The major difference to the previous case is the high severity of consequences for a substantial part of the data subjects15. 37. The quantity of breached data and the number of affected data subjects are high, because hospitals usually process large quantities of data. The unavailability of the data has a high impact on a substantial part of the data subjects. Moreover, there is a residual risk of high severity to the confidentiality of the patient data. 38. The type of the breach, nature, sensitivity, and volume of personal data affected in the breach are important. Even though a backup for the data existed and it could be restored in a few days, a high risk still exists due to the severity of consequences for the data subjects resulting from the lack of availability of the data at the moment of the attack and the following days. 2.3.2 CASE No. 03 – Mitigation and obligations 39. A notification to the SA is considered necessary, as special categories of personal data are involved and the restoration of the data could take a long time, resulting in major delays in patient care. Informing the data subjects about the breach is necessary due to the impact for the patients, even after restoring the encrypted data. While data relating to all patients treated in the hospital during the last years have been encrypted, only those patients who were scheduled to be treated in the hospital during the time the computer system was unavailable were impacted. The controller should communicate the data breach to those patients directly. Direct communication to the other patients some of which may not have been in the hospital for more than twenty years may not be required due to the exception in Article 34 (3) c). In such a case, there shall instead be a public communication16 or similar measure whereby the data subjects are informed in an equally effective manner. In this case, the hospital should make the ransomware attack and its effects public. 15 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. 16 GDPR Recital 86 explains that “Such communications to data subjects should be made as soon as reasonably feasible and in close cooperation with the supervisory authority, respecting guidance provided by it or by other relevant authorities such as law-enforcement authorities. For example, the need to mitigate an immediate risk of damage would call for prompt communication with data subjects whereas the need to implement appropriate measures against continuing or similar personal data breaches may justify more time for communication”. The information system of a hospital / healthcare centre was exposed to a ransomware attack and a significant proportion of its data was encrypted by the attacker. The company is using the expertise of an external cybersecurity company to monitor their network. Logs tracing all data flows leaving the company (including outbound email) are available. After analysing the logs and the data the other detection systems have collected the internal investigation aided by the cybersecurity company determined that the perpetrator only encrypted the data without exfiltrating it. The logs show no outward data flow in the timeframe of the attack. The personal data affected by the breach relates to the employees and patients, which represented thousands of individuals. Backups were available in an electronic form. Most of the data was restored but this operation lasted 2 working days and led to major delays in treating the patients with surgery cancelled / postponed, and to a lowering the level of service due to the unavailability of the systems. --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted - after public consultation 40. This case serves as an example for a ransomware attack with high risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects. It should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5), notified to the SA in accordance with Article 33 (1) and communicated to the data subjects in accordance with Article 34 (1). The organisation also needs to update and remediate its organizational and technical personal data security handling and risk mitigation measures and procedures. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to