However, any data that might have been exfiltrated cannot be read or used by the perpetrator, at least for the time being. The encryption technique used by the data controller conforms to the state-of-the-art. The decryption key was not compromised and presumably could also not be determined by other means. In consequence, the confidentiality risks to the Computer systems of a small manufacturing company were exposed to a ransomware attack, and data stored in those systems was encrypted. The data controller used encryption at rest, so all data accessed by the ransomware was stored in encrypted form using a state-of-the-art encryption algorithm. The decryption key was not compromised in the attack, i.e. the attacker could neither access it nor use it indirectly. In consequence, the attacker only had access to encrypted personal data. In particular, neither the email system of the company, nor any client systems used to access it were affected. The company is using the expertise of an external cybersecurity company to investigate the incident. Logs tracing all data flows leaving the company (including outbound email) are available. After analysing the logs and the data collected by the detection systems the company has deployed, an internal investigation supported by the external cybersecurity company determined with certainty that the perpetrator only encrypted data, without exfiltrating it. The logs show no outward data flow in the timeframe of the attack. The personal data affected by the breach relates to clients and employees of the company, a few dozen individuals altogether. A backup was readily available, and the data was restored a few hours after the attack took place. The breach did not result in any consequences on the day-to-day operation of the controller. There was no delay in employee payments or handling client requests. --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted - after public consultation rights and freedoms of natural persons are reduced to a minimum barring cryptanalytic progress that renders the encrypted data intelligible in the future. 21. The data controller should consider the risk to individuals due to the breach10. In this case, it appears the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects result from the lack of availability of the personal data, and the confidentiality of the personal data is not compromised11. In this example, the adverse effects of the breach were mitigated fairly soon after the breach occurred. Having a proper backup regime12 makes the effects of the breach less severe and here the controller was able to effectively make use of it. 22. On the severity of the consequences for the data subjects, only minor consequences could be identified since the affected data was restored in a few hours, the breach did not result in any consequences on the day-to-day operation of the controller and had no significant effect on the data subjects (e.g. employee payments or handling client requests). 2.1.2 CASE No. 01 – Mitigation and obligations 23. Without a backup few measures to remediate the loss of personal data can be undertaken by the controller, and the data has to be collected again. In this particular case however, the impacts of the attack could effectively be contained by resetting all compromised systems to a clean state known to be free of malicious code, fixing the vulnerabilities and restoring the affected data soon after the attack. Without a backup, data is lost and the severity may increase because risks or impacts to individuals may also do so. 24. The timeliness of an effective data restoration from the readily available backup is a key variable when analysing the breach. Specifying an appropriate timeframe to restore the compromised data depends on the unique circumstances of the breach at hand. The GDPR states that a personal data breach shall be notified without undue delay and, where feasible, not later than after 72 hours. Therefore, it could be determined that exceeding the 72-hour time limit is unadvisable in any case, but when dealing with high risk level cases, even complying with this deadline can be viewed as unsatisfactory. 25. In this case, following a detailed impact assessment and incident response process, the controller determined that the breach was unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons, hence no communication to the data subjects is necessary, nor does the breach require a notification to 10 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see A29 Working Party “Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679”, WP248 rev. 01, - endorsed by EDPB, https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/items/611236, p. 9. 11 Technically, encryption of data will involve “access” to original data, and in the case of ransomware, the deletion of the original – the data needs to be accessed by ransomware code to encrypt it, and to remove the original data. An attacker may take a copy of the original before deletion, but personal data will not always be extracted. As a data controller’s investigation progresses, new information may come to light to make this assessment change. Access that results in unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of the personal data, or to a security risk to a data subject, even without interpretation of the data may be as severe as access with interpretation of the personal data. 12 Backup procedures should be structured, consistent and repeatable. Examples of back up procedures are the 3-2-1 method and the grandfather-father-son method. Any method should always be tested for effectiveness in coverage and when data is to be restored. Testing should also be repeated at intervals and especially when changes occur in the processing operation or its circumstances to ensure the integrity of the system. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted - after public consultation the SA. However, as all data breaches, it should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5). The organisation may also need (or later be required by the SA) to update and remediate its organizational and technical personal data security handling and risk mitigation measures and procedures. Within the frame of this update and remediation, the organisation should thoroughly investigate the breach and identify the causes and the methods used by the perpetrator in order to prevent any similar events in the future. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 2.2 CASE No. 02: Ransomware without proper backup 2.2.1 CASE No. 02 - Prior measures and risk assessment 26. The data controller should have adopted the same prior measures as mentioned in part 2.1. and in section 2.9. The major difference to the previous case is the lack of an electronic backup and the lack of encryption at rest. This leads to critical differences in the following steps. 27. When assessing the risks, the controller should investigate the method of infiltration and identify the type of the malicious code to understand the possible consequences of the attack. In this example the ransomware encrypted the personal data without exfiltrating it. As a result, it appears the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects result from the lack of availability of the personal data, and the confidentiality of the personal data is not compromised. A thorough examination of the firewall logs and its implications is essential in determining the risk. The data controller should present the factual findings of these investigations upon request. 28. The data controller needs to keep in mind that if the attack is more sophisticated the malware has the functionality to edit log files and remove the trace. So - given that logs are not forwarded or replicated to a central log server - even after a thorough investigation that determined that the personal data was not exfiltrated by the attacker, the data controller cannot state that the absence of a log entry proves the absence of exfiltration, therefore the likelihood of a confidentiality breach cannot be entirely dismissed. 29. The data controller should assess the risks of this breach13 if the data was accessed by the attacker. During the risk assessment, the data controller should also take into consideration the nature, the sensitivity, the 13 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. One of the computers used by an agricultural company was exposed to a ransomware attack and its data was encrypted by the attacker. The company is using the expertise of an external cybersecurity company to monitor their network. Logs tracing all data flows leaving the company (including outbound email) are available. After analysing the logs and the data the other detection systems have collected the internal investigation aided by the cybersecurity company determined that the perpetrator only encrypted the data, without exfiltrating it. The logs show no outward data flow in the timeframe of the attack. The personal data affected by the breach relates to the employees and clients of the company, a few dozen individuals altogether. No special