cases could be considered a mitigating factor, since the data subjects are also in a position to make the necessary steps to avoid further damages from the breach, for example by changing their password. In this case, notification was not mandatory, but in many cases it can be considered a good practice. 60. The data controller should correct the vulnerability and implement new security measures to avoid similar data breaches in the future like, for example, systematic security audits to the website. 61. The breach should be documented in accordance with Article 33 (5) but no notification or communication needed. 62. Also, it is strongly advisable to communicate a breach involving passwords to data subjects in any case even when the passwords were stored using a salted hash with an algorithm conforming to the state-of-the-art. The use of authentication methods obviating the need to process passwords on the server side is preferable. Data subjects should be given the choice to take appropriate measures regarding their own passwords. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 20 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. An SQL Injection vulnerability was exploited to gain access to a database of the server of a cooking website. Users were only allowed to choose arbitrary pseudonyms as usernames. The use of email addresses for this purpose was discouraged. Passwords stored in the database were hashed with a strong algorithm and the salt was not compromised. Affected data: hashed passwords of 1.200 users. For safety’s sake, the controller informed the data subjects about the breach via e-mail and asked them to change their passwords, especially if the same password was used for other services. --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted - after public consultation 3.3 CASE No. 07: Credential stuffing attack on a banking website 3.3.1 CASE No. 07 - Prior measures and risk assessment 63. It is important to mention that controllers handling data of highly personal nature21 have a larger responsibility in terms of providing adequate data security, e.g. having a security operation’s centre and other incident prevention, detection and response measures. Not meeting these higher standards will certainly result in more serious measures during an SA’s investigation. 64. The breach concerns financial data beyond the identity and user ID information, making it particularly severe. The number of individuals affected is high. 65. The fact that a breach could happen in such a sensitive environment points to significant data security holes in the controller’s system, and may be an indicator of a time when the review and update of affected measures is “necessary” in line with Articles 24 (1), 25 (1), and 32 (1) of the GDPR. The breached data permits the unique identification of data subjects and contains other information about them (including gender, date and place of birth), furthermore it can be used by the attacker to guess the customers’ passwords or to run a spear phishing campaign directed at the bank customers. 66. For these reasons, the data breach was deemed likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of all the data subjects concerned22. Therefore, the occurrence of material (e.g. financial loss) and non-material damage (e.g. identity theft or fraud) is a conceivable outcome. 3.3.2 CASE No. 07 – Mitigation and obligations 67. The controller’s measures mentioned in the case description are adequate. In the wake of the breach it also corrected the vulnerability of the website and took other steps to prevent similar future data breaches, such 21 Such as information of the data subjects referred to payment methods such as card numbers, bank accounts, online payment, payrolls, bank statements, economic studies or any other information that may reveal economic information pertaining to the data subjects. 22 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. A bank suffered a cyber-attack against one of its online banking websites. The attack aimed to enumerate all possible login user IDs using a fixed trivial password. The passwords consist of 8 digits. Due to a vulnerability of the website, in some cases information regarding data subjects (name, surname, gender, date and place of birth, fiscal code, user identification codes) were leaked to the attacker, even if the used password was not correct or the bank account not active anymore. This affected around 100.000 data subjects. Out of these, the attacker successfully logged into around 2.000 accounts which were using the trivial password tried by the attacker. After the fact, the controller was able to identify all illegitimate log-on attempts. The data controller could confirm that, according to antifraud checks, no transactions were performed by these accounts during the attack. The bank was aware of the data breach because its security operations centre detected a high number of login requests directed toward the website. In response, the controller disabled the possibility to log in to the website by switching it off and forced password resets of the compromised accounts. The controller communicated the breach only to the users with the compromised accounts, i.e. to users whose passwords were compromised or whose data was disclosed. --- PAGE 19 --- Adopted - after public consultation as adding two-factor authentication to the concerned website and moving up to a strong customer authentication. 68. Documenting the breach according to Article 33 (5) GDPR and notifying the SA about it are not optional in this scenario. Furthermore, the controller should notify all 100.000 data subjects (including the data subjects whose accounts were not compromised) in accordance with Article 34 GDPR. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    3.4 Organizational and technical measures for preventing / mitigating the impacts of hacker attacks 69. Just as in case of ransomware attacks, regardless of the outcome and the consequences of the attack, re- evaluating IT security is compulsory for controllers in similar cases. 70. Advisable measures:23 (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  State-of-the-art encryption and key management, especially when passwords, sensitive or financial data are being processed. Cryptographic hashing and salting for secret information (passwords) is always preferred over encryption of passwords. The use of authentication methods obviating the need to process passwords on the server side is preferable.  Keeping the system up to date (software and firmware). Ensuring that all IT security measures are in place, making sure they are effective and keeping them regularly updated when processing or circumstances change or evolve. In order to be able to demonstrate compliance with Article 5(1)(f) in accordance with Article 5 (2) GDPR the controller should maintain a record of all updates performed, including also the time when they were applied.  Use of strong authentication methods like two-factor authentication and authentication servers, complemented by an up-to-date password policy.  Secure development standards include the filtering of user input (using white listing as far as practicable), escaping user inputs and brute force prevention measures (such as limiting the maximum amount of retries). “Web Application Firewalls” may assist in the effective use of this technique.  Strong user privileges and access control management policy in place.  Use of appropriate, up-to-date, effective and integrated firewall, intrusion detection and other perimeter defence systems.  Systematic IT security audits and vulnerability assessments (penetration testing).  Regular reviews and testing to ensure that backups can be used to restore any data whose integrity or availability was affected.  No session ID in URL in plain text. 23 For secure web application development see also: https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Main_Page . --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted - after public consultation INTERNAL HUMAN RISK SOURCE 71. The role of human error in personal data breaches has to be highlighted, due to its common appearance. Since these types of breaches can be both intentional and unintentional, it is very hard for the data controllers to identify the vulnerabilities and adopt measures to avoid them. The International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners recognized the importance of addressing such human factors and adopted the resolution to address the role of human error in personal data breaches in October 201924. This resolution stresses that appropriate safeguarding measures should be taken to prevent human errors and provides a non-exhaustive list of such safeguards and approaches. 4.1 CASE No. 08: Exfiltration of business data by an employee 4.1.1 CASE No. 08 - Prior measures and risk assessment 72. In this particular case no prior measures were taken to prevent the employee from copying contact information of the company’s clientele, since he needed – and had – legitimate access to this information for his job tasks. Since fulfilling most customer relation jobs require some kind of employee