the risk. Two orders for shoes were packed by a retail company. Due to human error two packing bills were mixed up with the result that both products and the relevant packing bills were sent to the wrong person. This means that the two customers got each other's orders, including the packing bills containing the personal data. After becoming aware of the breach the data controller recalled the orders and sent them to the right recipients. --- PAGE 28 --- Adopted - after public consultation Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 6.2 CASE No. 14: Highly confidential personal data sent by mail by mistake 6.2.1 CASE No. 14 - Prior measures and risk assessment 110. Stricter rules should have been implemented for sending such messages. The introduction of additional control mechanisms need to be considered. 111. The number of affected individuals is considerable, and the involvement of their social security number, along with other, more basic personal data, further increases the risk, which can be identified as high31. The eventual distribution of the data by any of the recipients cannot be contained by the controller. 6.2.2 CASE No. 14 – Mitigation and obligations 112. As mentioned earlier, the means to effectively mitigate the risks of a similar breach, are limited. Though the controller asked for the deletion of the message, it cannot force the recipients to do so, and as a consequence, nor can it be certain that they comply with the request. 113. The execution of all three below indicated actions should be self-evident in a case like this. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects    6.3 CASE No. 15: Personal data sent by mail by mistake 6.3.1 CASE No. 15 - Prior measures and risk assessment 114. Strict rules should have been implemented for sending of messages containing personal data. The introduction of additional control mechanisms need to be considered. 31 For guidance on “likely to result in high risk” processing operations, see footnote 10 above. The employment department of a public administration office sent an e-mail message – about upcoming trainings - to the individuals registered in its system as jobseekers. By mistake, a document containing all these jobseekers’ personal data (name, e-mail address, postal address, social security number) was attached to this e-mail. The number of affected individuals is more than 60000. Subsequently the office contacted all the recipients and asked them to delete the previous message and not to use the information contained in it. A list of participants on a course in Legal English which takes place in a hotel for 5 days is by mistake sent to 15 former participants of the course instead of the hotel. The list contains names, e-mail addresses and food preferences of the 15 participants. Only two participants have filled in their food preferences, stating that they are lactose intolerant. None of the participants have a protected identity. The controller discovers the mistake immediately after sending the list and informs the recipients of the mistake and asks them to delete the list. --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted - after public consultation 115. The risks deriving from the nature, the sensitivity, the volume and the context of the personal data are low. The personal data includes sensitive data on food preferences of two of the participants. Even if the information that someone is lactose intolerant is health data, the risk that this data will be used in a detrimental way should be considered relatively low. While in the case of data concerning health it is usually assumed that the breach is likely to result in a high risk for the data subject32, at the same time in this particular case no risk can be identified that the breach will lead to physical, material or non-material damages of the data subject due to the unauthorised disclosure of lactose intolerance information. Contrary to some other food preferences, lactose intolerance can normally not be linked to any religious or philosophical beliefs. The quantity of the breached data and the number of affected data subjects is very low as well. 6.3.2 CASE No. 15 – Mitigation and obligations 116. In summary, it can be stated that the breach had no significant effect on the data subjects. The fact that the controller immediately contacted the recipients after becoming aware of the mistake can be considered as a mitigating factor. 117. If an email is sent to an incorrect/unauthorised recipient, it is recommended that the data controller should Bcc a follow up email to the unintended recipients apologising, instructing that the offending email should be deleted, and advising recipients that they do not have the right to further use the email addresses identified to them. 118. Due to these facts this data breach was unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, hence no notification to the SA or the concerned data subjects was necessary. However, this data breach must also be documented in accordance with Article 33(5). Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects  X X 6.4 CASE No. 16: Postal mail mistake 6.4.1 CASE No. 16 - Prior measures and risk assessment 119. The incorrectly delivered letter contains the name, address, date of birth, unmasked vehicle registration number and the classification of the insurance rate of the current and the next year. The effects on the affected person are to be regarded as medium, since information not publicly available such as the date of 32See Guidelines WP 250, p. 23. An insurance group offers car insurances. To do this, it sends out regularly adjusted contribution policies by postal mail. In addition to the name and address of the policyholder, the letter contains the vehicle registration number without masked digits, the insurance rates of the current and next insurance year, the approximate annual mileage and the policyholder's date of birth. Health data according to Article 9 GDPR, payment data (bank details), economic and financial data are not included. Letters are packed by automated enveloping machines. Due to a mechanical error, two letters for different policyholders are inserted into one envelope and sent to one policyholder by letter post. The policyholder opens the letter at home and takes a look at his correctly delivered letter as well as at the incorrectly delivered letter from another policyholder. --- PAGE 30 --- Adopted - after public consultation birth or unmasked vehicle registration numbers, and details about the increment in insurance rates are disclosed to the unauthorized recipient. The probability of misuse of this data is assessed to be between low and medium. However, while many recipients will probably dispose of the wrongly received letter in the garbage, in individual cases it cannot be completely ruled out that the letter will be posted in social networks or that the policyholder will be contacted. 6.4.2 CASE No. 16 – Mitigation and obligations 120. The controller should have the original document returned at its own expense. The wrong recipient should also be informed that he/she may not misuse the information read. 121. It will probably never be possible to completely prevent a postal delivery error in a mass mailing using fully automated machines. However, in the event of an increased frequency, it is necessary to check whether the enveloping machines are set and maintained correctly enough, or if some other systemic issue leads to such a breach. Actions necessary based on the identified risks Internal documentation Notification to SA Communication to data subjects   X 6.5 Organizational and technical measures for preventing / mitigating the impacts of mispostal 122. A combination of the below mentioned measures – applied depending on the unique features of the case - should help to lower the chance of a similar breach reoccurring. 123. Advisable measures: (The list of the following measures is by no means exclusive or comprehensive. Rather, the goal is to provide prevention ideas and possible solutions. Every processing activity is different, hence the controller should make the decision on which measures fit the given situation the most.)  Setting exact standards – with no room for interpretation - for sending letters / e-mails.  Adequate training for personnel on how to send letters / e-mails.  When sending e-mails to multiple recipients, they are listed in the ’bcc’ field by default.  Extra confirmation is required when sending e-mails to multiple recipients, and they are not listed in the ’bcc’ field.  Application of the four-eyes principle.  Automatic addressing instead of manual, with data extracted from an available and up-to-date database; the automatic addressing system should be regularly reviewed to check for hidden errors and incorrect settings.  Application of message delay (e.g. the message can be deleted / edited within a certain time period after clicking the press button).  Disabling autocomplete when typing in e-mail