Right to be informed | ICO Skip to main content Right to be informed Download options (Opens download panel) Pages All pages This page Format PDF Download Due to the Data (Use and Access) Act coming into law on 19 June 2025, this guidance is under review and may be subject to change. The Plans for new and updated guidance page will tell you about which guidance will be updated and when this will happen. Contents Search this document At a glance Individuals have the right to be informed about the collection and use of their personal data. This is a key transparency requirement under the UK GDPR. You must provide individuals with information including: your purposes for processing their personal data, your retention periods for that personal data, and who it will be shared with. We call this ‘privacy information’. You must provide privacy information to individuals at the time you collect their personal data from them. If you obtain personal data from other sources, you must provide individuals with privacy information within a reasonable period of obtaining the data and no later than one month. There are a few circumstances when you do not need to provide people with privacy information, such as if an individual already has the information or if it would involve a disproportionate effort to provide it to them. The information you provide to people must be concise, transparent, intelligible, easily accessible, and it must use clear and plain language. It is often most effective to provide privacy information to people using a combination of different techniques including layering, dashboards, and just-in-time notices. User testing is a good way to get feedback on how effective the delivery of your privacy information is. You must regularly review, and where necessary, update your privacy information. You must bring any new uses of an individual’s personal data to their attention before you start the processing. Getting the right to be informed correct can help you to comply with other aspects of the GDPR and build trust with people, but getting it wrong can leave you open to fines and lead to reputational damage. Checklists What to provide We provide individuals with all the following privacy information: ☐ The name and contact details of our organisation. ☐ The name and contact details of our representative (if applicable). ☐ The contact details of our data protection officer (if applicable). ☐ The purposes of the processing. ☐ The lawful basis for the processing. ☐ The legitimate interests for the processing (if applicable). ☐ The categories of personal data obtained (if the personal data is not obtained from the individual it relates to). ☐ The recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data. ☐ The details of transfers of the personal data to any third countries or international organisations (if applicable). ☐ The retention periods for the personal data. ☐ The rights available to individuals in respect of the processing. ☐ The right to withdraw consent (if applicable). ☐ The right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority. ☐ The source of the personal data (if the personal data is not obtained from the individual it relates to). ☐ The details of whether individuals are under a statutory or contractual obligation to provide the personal data (if applicable, and if the personal data is collected from the individual it relates to). ☐ The details of the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling (if applicable). When to provide it ☐ We provide individuals with privacy information at the time we collect their personal data from them. If we obtain personal data from a source other than the individual it relates to, we provide them with privacy information: ☐ within a reasonable period of obtaining the personal data and no later than one month; ☐ if we plan to communicate with the individual, at the latest, when the first communication takes place; or ☐ if we plan to disclose the data to someone else, at the latest, when the data is disclosed. How to provide it We provide the information in a way that is: ☐ concise; ☐ transparent; ☐ intelligible; ☐ easily accessible; and ☐ uses clear and plain language. Changes to the information ☐ We regularly review and, where necessary, update our privacy information. ☐ If we plan to use personal data for a new purpose, we update our privacy information and communicate the changes to individuals before starting any new processing. Best practice – drafting the information ☐ We undertake an information audit to find out what personal data we hold and what we do with it. ☐ We put ourselves in the position of the people we’re collecting information about. ☐ We carry out user testing to evaluate how effective our privacy information is. Best practice – delivering the information When providing our privacy information to individuals, we use a combination of appropriate techniques, such as: ☐ a layered approach; ☐ dashboards; ☐ just-in-time notices; ☐ icons; and ☐ mobile and smart device functionalities. In brief What is the right to be informed and why is it important? What privacy information should we provide? When should we provide privacy information? Are there any exceptions? How should we draft our privacy information? What methods can we use to provide privacy information? What common issues might come up in practice ? The right to be informed in more detail What is the right to be informed? The right to be informed covers some of the key transparency requirements of the UK GDPR. It is about providing people with clear and concise information about what you do with their personal information. Articles 13 and 14 of the UK GDPR specify what people have the right to be informed about, as a minimum. We call this ‘privacy information’. Using an effective approach can help you to comply with other aspects of the UK GDPR, foster trust with people and obtain more useful information from them. Getting this wrong can leave you open to fines and lead to reputational damage. Although the right to be informed is a key requirement and an important part of transparency, remember that simply providing the information set out in Articles 13 and 14 will not always be enough to satisfy the wider transparency principle. For more information, read our guidance about transparency . What privacy information should we provide? The table below summarises the information that you must provide. What you need to tell people differs slightly depending on whether you collect personal data from the individual it relates to or obtain it from another source. What information do we need to provide? Personal data collected from individuals Personal data obtained from other sources The name and contact details of your organisation ✓ ✓ The name and contact details of your representative ✓ ✓ The contact details of your data protection officer ✓ ✓ The purposes of the processing ✓ ✓ The lawful basis for the processing ✓ ✓ The legitimate interests for the processing ✓ ✓ The categories of personal data obtained ✓ The recipients or categories of recipients of the personal data ✓ ✓ The details of transfers of the personal data to any third countries or international organisations ✓ ✓ The retention periods for the personal data ✓ ✓ The rights available to individuals in respect of the processing ✓ ✓ The right to withdraw consent ✓ ✓ The right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority ✓ ✓ The source of the personal data ✓ The details of whether individuals are under a statutory or contractual obligation to provide the personal data ✓ The details of the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling ✓ ✓ When should we provide privacy information? When you collect personal data from the individual it relates to, you must provide them with privacy information at the time you obtain their data. When you obtain personal data from a source other than the individual it relates to, you need to provide the individual with privacy information: within a reasonable period of obtaining the personal data and no later than one month; if you use the data to communicate with the individual, at the latest, when the first communication takes place; or if you envisage disclosure to someone else, at the latest, when you disclose the data. You must actively provide privacy information to individuals. You can meet this requirement by putting the information on your website, but you must make individuals aware of it and give them an easy way to access it. Are there any exceptions? When collecting personal data from individuals, you do not need to provide them with any information that they already have. When obtaining personal data from other sources, you do not need to provide individuals with privacy information if: the individual already has the information; providing the information to the individual would be impossible; providing the information to the individual would involve a disproportionate effort; providing the information to the individual