6. DPbDD is a requirement for all controllers, including small businesses and multinational companies alike. That being the case, the complexity of implementing DPbDD may vary based on the individual processing operation. Regardless of the size however, in all cases, positive benefits for controller and data subject can be achieved by implementing DPbDD. 2.1 Article 25(1): Data protection by design 2.1.1 Controller’s obligation to implement appropriate technical and organisational measures and necessary safeguards into the processing 7. In line with Article 25(1) the controller shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measures which are designed to implement the data protection principles and to integrate the necessary safeguards into the processing in order to meet the requirements and protect the rights and freedoms of data subjects. Both appropriate measures and necessary safeguards are meant to serve the same purpose of protecting the rights of data subjects and ensuring that the protection of their personal data is built into the processing. 8. Technical and organizational measures and necessary safeguards can be understood in a broad sense as any method or means that a controller may employ in the processing. Being appropriate means that the measures and necessary safeguards should be suited to achieve the intended purpose, i.e. they must implement the data protection principles effectively3. The requirement to appropriateness is thus closely related to the requirement of effectiveness. 9. A technical or organisational measure and safeguard can be anything from the use of advanced technical solutions to the basic training of personnel. Examples that may be suitable, depending on the context and risks associated with the processing in question, includes pseudonymization of personal data4; storing personal data available in a structured, commonly machine readable format; enabling data subjects to intervene in the processing; providing information about the storage of personal data; having malware detection systems; training employees about basic “cyber hygiene”; establishing privacy and information security management systems, obligating processors contractually to implement specific data minimisation practices, etc. 10. Standards, best practices and codes of conduct that are recognized by associations and other bodies representing categories of controllers can be helpful in determining appropriate measures. However, the controller must verify the appropriateness of the measures for the particular processing in question. 2.1.2 Designed to implement the data protection principles in an effective manner and protecting data subjects’ rights and freedoms 11. The data protection principles are in Article 5 (henceforth “the principles”), the data subjects’ rights and freedoms are the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, and in particular their right to the protection of personal data, whose protection is named in Article 1(2) as the objective of the 3 “Effectiveness” is addressed below in subchapter 2.1.2. 4 Defined in Article 4(5) GDPR. --- PAGE 7 --- Adopted GDPR (henceforth “the rights”)5. Their precise formulation can be found in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. It is essential for the controller to have an understanding of the meaning of the principles and the rights as the basis for the protection offered by the GDPR, specifically by the DPbDD obligation. 12. When implementing the appropriate technical and organisational measures, it is with respect to the effective implementation of each of the aforementioned principles and the ensuing protection of rights that the measures and safeguards should be designed. Addressing effectiveness 13. Effectiveness is at the heart of the concept of data protection by design. The requirement to implement the principles in an effective manner means that controllers must implement the necessary measures and safeguards to protect these principles, in order to secure the rights of data subjects. Each implemented measure should produce the intended results for the processing foreseen by the controller. This observation has two consequences. 14. First, it means that Article 25 does not require the implementation of any specific technical and organizational measures, rather that the chosen measures and safeguards should be specific to the implementation of data protection principles into the particular processing in question. In doing so, the measures and safeguards should be designed to be robust and the controller should be able to implement further measures in order to scale to any increase in risk6. Whether or not measures are effective will therefore depend on the context of the processing in question and an assessment of certain elements that should be taken into account when determining the means of processing. The aforementioned elements will be addressed below in subchapter 2.1.3. 15. Second, controllers should be able to demonstrate that the principles have been maintained. 16. The implemented measures and safeguards should achieve the desired effect in terms of data protection, and the controller should have documentation of the implemented technical and organizational measures.7 To do so, the controller may determine appropriate key performance indicators (KPI) to demonstrate the effectiveness. A KPI is a measurable value chosen by the controller that demonstrates how effectively the controller achieves their data protection objective. KPIs may be quantitative, such as the percentage of false positives or false negatives, reduction of complaints, reduction of response time when data subjects exercise their rights; or qualitative, such as evaluations of performance, use of grading scales, or expert assessments. Alternatively to KPIs, controllers may be able to demonstrate the effective implementation of the principles by providing the rationale behind their assessment of the effectiveness of the chosen measures and safeguards. 2.1.3 Elements to take into account 17. Article 25 (1) lists elements that the controller has to take into account when determining the measures of a specific processing operation. In the following, we will provide guidance on how to apply 5 See Recital 4 of the GDPR. 6 “Fundamental principles applicable to the controllers (i.e. legitimacy, data minimisation, purpose limitation, transparency, data integrity, data accuracy) should remain the same, whatever the processing and the risks for the data subjects. However, due regard to the nature and scope of such processing have always been an integral part of the application of those principles, so that they are inherently scalable.” Article 29 Working Party. “Statement on the role of a risk-based approach in data protection legal frameworks”. WP 218, 30 May 2014, p. 3. ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2014/wp218_en.pdf 7 See Recitals 74 and 78. --- PAGE 8 --- Adopted these elements in the design process, which includes design of the default settings. These elements all contribute to determine whether a measure is appropriate to effectively implement the principles. Thus, each of these elements is not a goal in and of themselves, but are factors to be considered together to reach the objective. 2.1.3.1 “state of the art” 18. The concept of “state of the art” is present in various EU acquis, e.g. environmental protection and product safety. In the GDPR, reference to the “state of the art”8 is made not only in Article 32, for security measures,910 but also in Article 25, thus extending this benchmark to all technical and organisational measures embedded in the processing. 19. In the context of Article 25, the reference to “state of the art” imposes an obligation on controllers, when determining the appropriate technical and organisational measures, to take account of the current progress in technology that is available in the market. The requirement is for controllers to have knowledge of, and stay up to date on technological advances; how technology can present data protection risks or opportunities to the processing operation; and how to implement and update the measures and safeguards that secure effective implementation of the principles and rights of data subjects taking into account the evolving technological landscape. 20. The “state of the art” is a dynamic concept that cannot be statically defined at a fixed point in time, but should be assessed continuously in the context of technological progress. In the face of technological advancements, a controller could find that a measure that once provided an adequate level of protection no longer does. Neglecting to keep up to date with technological changes could therefore result in a lack of compliance with Article 25. 21. The “state of the art” criterion does not only apply to technological measures, but also to organisational ones. Lack of appropriate organisational measures can lower or even completely undermine the effectiveness of a chosen technology. Examples of organisational measures can be adoption of internal policies; up-to date training on technology, security and data protection; and IT security governance and management policies. 22. Existing and recognized frameworks, standards, certifications, codes of conduct, etc. in different fields may play a role in indicating the current “state of the art” within the given field of use. Where such standards exist and provide a high level of protection for the data subject in compliance with – or go beyond – legal requirements, controllers should take them into account in the design and implementation of data protection measures. 2.1.3.2 “cost of implementation” 23. The controller may take the cost of implementation into account when choosing and applying appropriate technical and organisational measures and necessary safeguards that effectively 8 See German Federal Constitutional Court’s “Kalkar” decision in 1978: https://germanlawarchive.iuscomp.org/?p=67 may provide the foundation