processing systems and their supporting functions are permissible. Data minimisation substantiates and operationalises the principle of necessity. In the further processing, the controller should periodically consider whether processed personal data is still adequate, relevant and necessary, or if the data shall be deleted or anonymized. 74. Controllers should first of all determine whether they even need to process personal data for their relevant purposes. The controller should verify whether the relevant purposes can be achieved by processing less personal data, or having less detailed or aggregated personal data or without having to process personal data at all37. Such verification should take place before any processing takes place, but could also be carried out at any point during the processing lifecycle. This is also consistent with Article 11. 75. Minimising can also refer to the degree of identification. If the purpose of the processing does not require the final set of data to refer to an identified or identifiable individual (such as in statistics), but the initial processing does (e.g. before data aggregation), then the controller shall delete or anonymize personal data as soon as identification is no longer needed. Or, if continued identification is needed for other processing activities, personal data should be pseudonymized to mitigate risks for the data subjects’ rights. 76. Key design and default data minimisation elements may include:  Data avoidance – Avoid processing personal data altogether when this is possible for the relevant purpose.  Limitation – Limit the amount of personal data collected to what is necessary for the purpose  Access limitation – Shape the data processing in a way that a minimal number of people need access to personal data to perform their duties, and limit access accordingly.  Relevance – Personal data should be relevant to the processing in question, and the controller should be able to demonstrate this relevance.  Necessity – Each personal data category shall be necessary for the specified purposes and should only be processed if it is not possible to fulfil the purpose by other means.  Aggregation – Use aggregated data when possible.  Pseudonymization – Pseudonymize personal data as soon as it is no longer necessary to have directly identifiable personal data, and store identification keys separately.  Anonymization and deletion – Where personal data is not, or no longer necessary for the purpose, personal data shall be anonymized or deleted.  Data flow – The data flow should be made efficient enough to not create more copies than necessary.  “State of the art” – The controller should apply up to date and appropriate technologies for data avoidance and minimisation. 36 Art. 5(1)(c) GDPR. 37 Recital 39 GDPR so states: “...Personal data should be processed only if the purpose of the processing could not reasonably be fulfilled by other means.” --- PAGE 22 --- Adopted Example 1 A bookshop wants to add to their revenue by selling their books online. The bookshop owner wants to set up a standardised form for the ordering process. To ensure customers fill out all the wanted information the bookshop owner makes all of the fields in the form mandatory (if you don’t fill out all the fields the customer can’t place the order). The webshop owner initially uses a standard contact form, which asks information including the customer’s date of birth, phone number and home address. However, not all the fields in the form are necessary for the purpose of buying and delivering the books. In this particular case, if the data subject pays for the product up front, the data subject’s date of birth and phone number are not necessary for the purchase of the product. This means that these cannot be required fields in the web form to order the product, unless the controller can clearly demonstrate that it is otherwise necessary, and why the fields are necessary. Moreover, there are situations where an address will not be necessary. For example, when ordering an eBook the customer can download the product directly to their device. The webshop owner therefore decides to make two web forms: one for ordering books, with a field for the customer’s address and one web form for ordering eBooks without a field for the customer’s address. Example 2 A public transportation company wishes to gather statistical information based on travellers’ routes. This is useful for the purposes of making proper choices on changes in public transport schedules and proper routings of the trains. The passengers have to pass their ticket through a reader every time they enter or exit a means of transport. Having carried out a risk assessment related to the rights and freedoms of passengers’ regarding the collection of passengers’ travel routes, the controller establishes that it is possible to identify the passengers in circumstances where they live or work in scarcely populated areas, based on single route identification thanks to the ticket identifier. Therefore, since it is not necessary for the purpose of optimizing the public transport schedules and routings of the trains, the controller does not store the ticket identifier. Once the trip is over, the controller only stores the individual travel routes so as to not be able to identify trips connected to a single ticket, but only retains information about separate travel routes. In cases where there can still be a risk of identifying a person solely by their public transportation travel route the controller implements statistical measures to reduce the risk, such as cutting the beginning and the end of the route. Example 3 A courier aims at assessing the effectiveness of its deliveries in terms of delivery times, workload scheduling and fuel consumption. In order to reach this goal, the courier has to process a number of personal data relating to both employees (drivers) and customers (addresses, items to be delivered, etc.). This processing operation entails risks of both monitoring employees, which requires specific legal safeguards, and tracking customers’ habits through the knowledge of the delivered items over time. These risks can be significantly reduced with appropriate pseudonymization of employees and customers. In particular if pseudonymization keys are frequently rotated and macro areas are considered instead of detailed addresses, an effective data minimisation is pursued, and the controller --- PAGE 23 --- Adopted can solely focus on the delivery process and on the purpose of resource optimization, without crossing the threshold of monitoring individuals’ (customers’ or employees’) behaviours. Example 4 A hospital is collecting data about its patients in a hospital information system (electronic health record). Hospital staff needs to access patient files to inform their decisions regarding care for and treatment of the patients, and for the documentation of all diagnostic, care and treatment actions taken. By default, access is granted to only those members of the medical staff who are assigned to the treatment of the respective patient in the speciality department she or he is assigned to. The group of people with access to a patient’s file is enlarged if other departments or diagnostic units are involved in the treatment. After the patient is discharged, and billing is completed, access is reduced to a small group of employees per speciality department who answer requests for medical information or a consultation made or asked for by other medical service providers upon authorization by the respective patient. 3.6 Accuracy 77. Personal data shall be accurate and kept up to date, and every reasonable step shall be taken to ensure that personal data that is inaccurate, having regard to the purposes for which they are processed, are erased or rectified without delay.38 78. The requirements should be seen in relation to the risks and consequences of the concrete use of data. Inaccurate personal data could be a risk to the data subjects’ rights and freedoms, for example when leading to a faulty diagnosis or wrongful treatment of a health protocol, or an incorrect image of a person can lead to decisions being made on the wrong basis either manually, using automated decision-making, or through artificial intelligence. 79. Key design and default accuracy elements may include:  Data source – Sources of personal data should be reliable in terms of data accuracy.  Degree of accuracy – Each personal data element should be as accurate as necessary for the specified purposes.  Measurably accurate - Reduce the number of false positives/negatives, for example biases in automated decisions and artificial intelligence.  Verification – Depending on the nature of the data, in relation to how often it may change, the controller should verify the correctness of personal data with the data subject before and at different stages of the processing (e.g. to age requirements).  Erasure/rectification – The controller shall erase or rectify inaccurate data without delay. The controller shall in particular facilitate this where the data subjects are or were children and later want to remove such personal data.39  Error propagation avoidance – Controllers should mitigate the effect of an accumulated error in the processing chain. 38 Art. 5(1)(d) GDPR. 39 Cf. Recital