suitable countermeasures.  No risk transfer – Controllers should not transfer the risks of the enterprise to the data subjects.  No deception – Data processing information and options should be provided in an objective and neutral way, avoiding any deceptive or manipulative language or design.  Respect rights – The controller must respect the fundamental rights of data subjects and implement appropriate measures and safeguards and not impinge on those rights unless expressly justified by law.  Ethical – The controller should see the processing’s wider impact on individuals’ rights and dignity.  Truthful – The controller must make available information about how they process personal data, they should act as they declare they will and not mislead the data subjects.  Human intervention – The controller must incorporate qualified human intervention that is capable of uncovering biases that machines may create in accordance with the right to not be subject to automated individual decision making in Article 22.32  Fair algorithms – Regularly assess whether algorithms are functioning in line with the purposes and adjust the algorithms to mitigate uncovered biases and ensure fairness in the processing. Data subjects should be informed about the functioning of the processing of personal data based on algorithms that analyse or make predictions about them, such as work performance, economic situation, health, personal preferences, reliability or behaviour, location or movements.33 32 See Guidelines on Automated individual decision-making and Profiling for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679. https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=49826 33 See Recital 71 GDPR. --- PAGE 19 --- Adopted Example 1 A controller operates a search engine that processes mostly user-generated personal data. The controller benefits from having large amounts of personal data and being able to use that personal data for targeted advertisements. The controller therefore wishes to influence data subjects to allow more extensive collection and use of their personal data. Consent is to be collected by presenting processing options to the data subject. When implementing the fairness principle, taking into account the nature, scope, context and purpose of the processing, the controller realizes that they cannot present the options in a way that nudges the data subject in the direction of allowing the controller to collect more personal data than if the options were presented in an equal and neutral way. This means that they cannot present the processing options in such a manner that makes it difficult for data subjects to abstain from sharing their data, or make it difficult for the data subjects to adjust their privacy settings and limit the processing. These are examples of dark patterns, which are contrary to the spirit of Article 25. The default options for the processing should not be invasive, and the choice for further processing should be presented in a manner that does not pressure the data subject to give consent. Therefore, the controller presents the options to consent or abstain as two equally visible choices, accurately representing the ramifications of each choice to the data subject. Example 2 Another controller processes personal data for the provision of a streaming service where users may choose between a regular subscription of standard quality and a premium subscription with higher quality. As part of the premium subscription, subscribers get prioritized customer service. With regard to the fairness principle, the prioritized customer service granted to premium subscribers cannot discriminate the regular subscribers’ access to exercise their rights according to the GDPR Article 12. This means that although the premium subscribers get prioritized service, such prioritization cannot result in a lack of appropriate measures to respond to request from regular subscribers without undue delay and in any event within one month of receipt of the requests. Prioritized customers may pay to get better service, but all data subjects shall have equal and indiscriminate access to enforce their rights and freedoms as required under Article 12. 3.4 Purpose Limitation34 71. The controller must collect data for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes, and not further process the data in a manner that is incompatible with the purposes for which they were collected.35 The design of the processing should therefore be shaped by what is necessary to achieve the purposes. If any 34 The Article 29 Working Party provided guidance for the understanding of the principle of purpose limitation under Directive 95/46/EC. Although the Opinion is not adopted by the EDBP, it may still be relevant as the wording of the principle is the same under the GDPR. Article 29 Working Party. “Opinion 03/2013 on purpose limitation”. WP 203, 2 April 2013. ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion- recommendation/files/2013/wp203_en.pdf 35 Art. 5(1)(b) GDPR. --- PAGE 20 --- Adopted further processing is to take place, the controller must first make sure that this processing has purposes compatible with the original ones and design such processing accordingly. Whether a new purpose is compatible or not, shall be assessed according to the criteria in Article 6(4). 72. Key design and default purpose limitation elements may include:  Predetermination – The legitimate purposes shall be determined before the design of the processing.  Specificity – The purposes shall be specified and explicit as to why personal data is being processed.  Purpose orientation – The purpose of processing should guide the design of the processing and set processing boundaries.  Necessity – The purpose determines what personal data is necessary for the processing.  Compatibility – Any new purpose must be compatible with the original purpose for which the data was collected and guide relevant changes in design.  Limit further processing – The controller should not connect datasets or perform any further processing for new incompatible purposes.  Limitations of reuse – The controller should use technical measures, including hashing and encryption, to limit the possibility of repurposing personal data. The controller should also have organisational measures, such as policies and contractual obligations, which limit reuse of personal data.  Review – The controller should regularly review whether the processing is necessary for the purposes for which the data was collected and test the design against purpose limitation. Example The controller processes personal data about its customers. The purpose of the processing is to fulfil a contract, i.e. to be able to deliver goods to the correct address and obtain payment. The personal data stored is the purchase history, name, address, e-mail address and telephone number. The controller is considering buying a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) product that gathers all the customer data about sales, marketing and customer service in one place. The product gives the opportunity of storing all phone calls, activities, documents, emails and marketing campaigns to get a 360-degree view of the customer. Moreover, the CRM is capable of automatically analysing the customers’ purchasing power by using public information. The purpose of the analysis is to better target advertising activities. Those activities do not form part of the original lawful purpose of the processing. To be in line with the principle of purpose limitation, the controller requires the provider of the product to map the different processing activities that use personal data to the purposes relevant for the controller. After receiving the results of the mapping, the controller assesses whether the new marketing purpose and the targeted advertisement purpose are compatible with the original purposes defined when the data was collected, and whether there is a sufficient legal basis for the respective processing. If the assessment does not return a positive answer, the controller shall not proceed to use the respective functionalities. Alternatively, the controller could choose to forego the assessment and simply not make use of the described functionalities of the product. --- PAGE 21 --- Adopted 3.5 Data Minimisation 73. Only personal data that is adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary for the purpose shall be processed.36 As a result, the controller has to predetermine which features and parameters of processing systems and their supporting functions are permissible. Data minimisation substantiates and operationalises the principle of necessity. In the further processing, the controller should periodically consider whether processed personal data is still adequate, relevant and necessary, or if the data shall be deleted or anonymized. 74. Controllers should first of all determine whether they even need to process personal data for their relevant purposes. The controller should verify whether the relevant purposes can be achieved by processing less personal data, or having less detailed or aggregated personal data or without having to process personal data at all37. Such verification should take place before any processing takes place, but could also be carried out at any point during the processing lifecycle. This is also consistent with Article 11. 75. Minimising can also refer to the degree of identification. If the purpose of the processing does not require the final set of data to refer to an identified or identifiable individual (such as in statistics), but the initial processing does (e.g. before data aggregation), then the controller shall delete or anonymize personal data as soon as identification is no longer needed. Or, if continued identification is needed for other processing activities, personal