risk may change over the course of processing, which means that the 12 Article 29 Working Party “Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679”. WP 248 rev.01, 4 October 2017. ec.europa.eu/newsroom/document.cfm?doc_id=47711 - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted controller must re-evaluate their processing operations through regular reviews and assessments of the effectiveness of their chosen measures and safeguards. 38. The obligation to maintain, review and update, as necessary, the processing operation also applies to pre-existing systems. This means that legacy systems designed before the GDPR entered into force are required to undergo reviews and maintenance to ensure the implementation of measures and safeguards that implement the principles and rights of data subjects in an effective manner, as outlined in these Guidelines. 39. This obligation also extends to any processing carried out by means of data processors. Processors’ operations should be regularly reviewed and assessed by the controllers to ensure that they enable continuous compliance with the principles and allow the data controller to fulfil its obligations in this respect. 2.2 Article 25(2): Data protection by default 2.2.1 By default, only personal data which are necessary for each specific purpose of the processing are processed 40. A “default”, as commonly defined in computer science, refers to the pre-existing or preselected value of a configurable setting that is assigned to a software application, computer program or device. Such settings are also called “presets” or “factory presets”, especially for electronic devices. 41. Hence, the term “by default” when processing personal data, refers to making choices regarding configuration values or processing options that are set or prescribed in a processing system, such as a software application, service or device, or a manual processing procedure that affect the amount of personal data collected, the extent of their processing, the period of their storage and their accessibility. 42. The controller should choose and be accountable for implementing default processing settings and options in a way that only processing that is strictly necessary to achieve the set, lawful purpose is carried out by default. Here, controllers should rely on their assessment of the necessity of the processing with regards to the legal grounds of Article 6(1). This means that by default, the controller shall not collect more data than is necessary, they shall not process the data collected more than is necessary for their purposes, nor shall they store the data for longer than necessary. The basic requirement is that data protection is built into the processing by default. 43. The controller is required to predetermine for which specified, explicit and legitimate purposes the personal data is collected and processed.13 The measures must by default be appropriate to ensure that only personal data which are necessary for each specific purpose of processing are being processed. The EDPS “Guidelines to assess necessity and proportionality of measures that limit the 13 Art. 5(1)(b), (c), (d), (e) GDPR. --- PAGE 12 --- Adopted right to data protection of personal data” can be useful also to decide which data is necessary to process in order to achieve a specific purpose.14 15 16 44. If the controller uses third party software or off-the-shelf software, the controller should carry out a risk assessment of the product and make sure that functions that do not have a legal basis or are not compatible with the intended purposes of processing are switched off. 45. The same considerations apply to organisational measures supporting processing operations. They should be designed to process, at the outset, only the minimum amount of personal data necessary for the specific operations. This should be particularly considered when allocating data access to staff with different roles and different access needs. 46. Appropriate “technical and organisational measures” in the context of data protection by default is thus understood in the same way as discussed above in subchapter 2.1.1, but applied specifically to implementing the principle of data minimisation. 47. The aforementioned obligation to only process personal data which are necessary for each specific purpose applies to the following elements. 2.2.2 Dimensions of the data minimisation obligation 48. Article 25 (2) lists the dimensions of the data minimisation obligation for default processing, by stating that the obligation applies to the amount of personal data collected, the extent of their processing, the period of their storage and their accessibility. 2.2.2.1 “amount of personal data collected” 49. Controllers should consider both the volume of personal data, as well as the types, categories and level of detail of personal data required for the processing purposes. Their design choices should take into account the increased risks to the principles of integrity and confidentiality, data minimisation and storage limitation when collecting large amounts of detailed personal data, and compare it to the reduction in risks when collecting smaller amounts and/or less detailed information about data subjects. In any case, the default setting shall not include collection of personal data that is not necessary for the specific processing purpose. In other words, if certain categories of personal data are unnecessary or if detailed data isn’t needed because less granular data is sufficient, then any surplus personal data shall not be collected. 50. The same default requirements apply to services independent of what platform or device in use, only the necessary personal data for the given purpose can be collected. 14 EDPS. “Guidelines on assessing the necessity and proportionality of measures that limit the right to data protection”. 25 February 2019. edps.europa.eu/sites/edp/files/publication/19-02- 25_proportionality_guidelines_en.pdf 15 See also EDPS. “Assessing the necessity of measures that limit the fundamental right to the protection of personal data: A Toolkit” https://edps.europa.eu/data-protection/our-work/publications/papers/necessity- toolkit_en 16 For more information on necessity, see Article 29 Working Party. “Opinion 06/2014 on the notion of legitimate interests of the data controller under Article 7 of Directive 95/46/EC”. WP 217, 9 April 2014. ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2014/wp217_en.pdf --- PAGE 13 --- Adopted 2.2.2.2 “the extent of their processing” 51. Processing17 operations performed on personal data shall be limited to what is necessary. Many processing operations may contribute to a processing purpose. Nevertheless, the fact that certain personal data is necessary to fulfil a purpose does not mean that all types of, and frequencies of, processing operations may be carried out on the data. Controllers should also be careful not to extend the boundaries of “compatible purposes” of Article 6(4), and have in mind what processing will be within the reasonable expectations of data subjects. 2.2.2.3 “the period of their storage” 52. Personal data collected shall not be stored if it is not necessary for the purpose of the processing and there is no other compatible purpose and legal ground according to Article 6(4). Any retention should be objectively justifiable as necessary by the data controller in accordance with the accountability principle. 53. The controller shall limit the retention period to what is necessary for the purpose. If personal data is no longer necessary for the purpose of the processing, then it shall by default be deleted or anonymized. The length of the period of retention will therefore depend on the purpose of the processing in question. This obligation is directly related to the principle of storage limitation in Article 5(1)(e), and shall be implemented by default, i.e. the controller should have systematic procedures for data deletion or anonymization embedded in the processing. 54. Anonymization18 of personal data is an alternative to deletion, provided that all the relevant contextual elements are taken into account and the likelihood and severity of the risk, including the risk of re- identification, are regularly assessed.19 2.2.2.4 “their accessibility” 55. The controller should limit who has access and which types of access to personal data based on an assessment of necessity, and also make sure that personal data is in fact accessible to those who need it when necessary, for example in critical situations. Access controls should be observed for the whole data flow during the processing. 56. Article 25(2) further states that personal data shall not be made accessible, without the individual’s intervention, to an indefinite number of natural persons. The controller shall by default limit accessibility and give the data subject the possibility to intervene before publishing or otherwise making available personal data about the data subject to an indefinite number of natural persons. 57. Making personal data available to an indefinite number of persons may result in even further dissemination of the data than initially intended. This is particularly relevant in the context of the Internet and search engines. This means that controllers should by default give data subjects an 17 According to Art. 4(2) GDPR, this includes collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or destruction. 18 Article 29 Working Party. “Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques”. WP 216, 10 April 2014. ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2014/wp216_en.pdf 19 Please see Art. 4(1) GDPR, Recital 26 GDPR, Article 29 Working Party “Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques”.