the up-to-date retention policy. 3.8 Integrity and confidentiality 83. The principle of integrity and confidentiality includes protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures. The security of personal data requires appropriate measures designed to prevent and manage data breach incidents; to guarantee the proper execution of data processing tasks, and compliance with the other principles; and to facilitate the effective exercise of individuals’ rights. 84. Recital 78 states that one of the DPbDD measures could consist of enabling the controller to “create and improve security features”. Along with other DPbDD measures, Recital 78 suggests a responsibility on the controllers to continually assess whether it is using the appropriate means of processing at all times and to assess whether the chosen measures actually counter the existing vulnerabilities. Furthermore, controllers should conduct regular reviews of the information security measures that surround and protect personal data, and the procedure for handling data breaches. 85. Key design and default integrity and confidentiality elements may include:  Information security management system (ISMS) – Have an operative means of managing policies and procedures for information security.  Risk analysis – Assess the risks against the security of personal data by considering the impact on individuals’ rights and counter identified risks. For use in risk assessment; develop and maintain a comprehensive, systematic and realistic “threat modelling” and an attack surface analysis of the designed software to reduce attack vectors and opportunities to exploit weak points and vulnerabilities.  Security by design – Consider security requirements as early as possible in the system design and development and continuously integrate and perform relevant tests.  Maintenance – Regular review and test software, hardware, systems and services, etc. to uncover vulnerabilities of the systems supporting the processing.  Access control management – Only the authorized personnel who need to should have access to the personal data necessary for their processing tasks, and the controller should differentiate between access privileges of authorized personnel. o Access limitation (agents) – Shape the data processing in a way that a minimal number of people need access to personal data to perform their duties, and limit access accordingly. o Access limitation (content) – In the context of each processing operation, limit access to only those attributes per data set that are needed to perform that operation. --- PAGE 27 --- Adopted Moreover, limit access to data pertaining to those data subjects who are in the remit of the respective employee. o Access segregation – Shape the data processing in a way that no individual needs comprehensive access to all data collected about a data subject, much less all personal data of a particular category of data subjects.  Secure transfers – Transfers shall be secured against unauthorized and accidental access and changes.  Secure storage – Data storage shall be secure from unauthorized access and changes. There should be procedures to assess the risk of centralized or decentralized storage, and what categories of personal data this applies to. Some data may need additional security measures than others or isolation from others.  Pseudonymization – Personal data and back-ups/logs should be pseudonymized as a security measure to minimise risks of potential data breaches, for example using hashing or encryption.  Backups/logs – Keep back-ups and logs to the extent necessary for information security, use audit trails and event monitoring as a routine security control. These shall be protected from unauthorised and accidental access and change and reviewed regularly and incidents should be handled promptly.  Disaster recovery/ business continuity – Address information system disaster recovery and business continuity requirements to restore the availability of personal data following up major incidents.  Protection according to risk – All categories of personal data should be protected with measures adequate with respect to the risk of a security breach. Data presenting special risks should, when possible, be kept separated from the rest of the personal data.  Security incident response management – Have in place routines, procedures and resources to detect, contain, handle, report and learn from data breaches.  Incident management – Controller should have processes in place to handle breaches and incidents, in order to make the processing system more robust. This includes notification procedures, such as management of notification (to the supervisory authority) and information (to data subjects). Example A controller wants to extract large quantities of personal data from a medical database containing electronic (patient) health records to a dedicated database server in the company in order to process the extracted data for quality assurance purposes. The company has assessed the risk for routing the extracts to a server that is accessible to all of the company’s employees as likely to be high for data subjects’ rights and freedoms. Since there is only one department in the company who needs to process the patient data extracts, the controller decides to restrict access to the dedicated server to employees in that department. Moreover, to further reduce risk, the data will be pseudonymized before they are transferred. To regulate access and mitigate possible damage from malware, the company decides to segregate the network, and establish access controls to the server. In addition, they put up security monitoring and an intrusion detection and prevention system and isolates it from routine use. An automated auditing system is put in place to monitor access and changes. Reporting and automated alerts are generated from this when certain events related to usage are configured. The controller will ensure that users only have access on a need to know basis and with the appropriate access level. Inappropriate use can be quickly and easily detected. --- PAGE 28 --- Adopted Some of the extracts have to be compared with new extracts, and therefore are required to be stored for three months. The controller decides to put them into separate databases on the same server, and use both transparent and column-level encryption to store them. Keys for column data decryption are stored in dedicated security modules that can only be used by authorized personnel, but not extracted. Handling upcoming incidents makes the system more robust, and reliable. The data controller understands that preventative and effective measures and safeguards should be built into all personal data processing it undertakes now and in the future, and that doing so may help prevent future such data breach incidents. The controller establishes these security measures both to ensure accuracy, integrity and confidentiality, but also to prevent malware spread by cyber-attacks and to make the solution robust. Having robust security measures contributes to build trust with the data subjects. 3.9 Accountability41 86. The principle of accountability states that the controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate compliance with all of the abovementioned principles. 87. The controller needs to be able to demonstrate compliance with the principles. In doing so, the controller may demonstrate the effects of the measures taken to protect the data subjects’ rights, and why the measures are considered to be appropriate and effective. For example, demonstrating why a measure is appropriate to ensure the principle of storage limitation in an effective manner. 88. To be able to process personal data responsibly, the controller should have both the knowledge of and the ability to implement data protection. This entails that the controller should understand their data protection obligations of the GDPR and be able to comply with these obligations. ARTICLE 25(3) CERTIFICATION 89. According to Article 25(3), certification pursuant to Article 42 may be used as an element to demonstrate compliance with DPbDD. Conversely, documents demonstrating compliance with DPbDD may also be useful in a certification process. This means that where a processing operation by a controller or a processor has been certified as per Article 42, supervisory authorities shall take this into account in their assessment of compliance with the GDPR, specifically with regards to DPbDD. 90. When a processing operation by a controller or processor is certified according to Article 42, the elements that contribute to demonstrating compliance with Article 25(1) and (2) are the design processes, i.e. the process of determining the means of processing, the governance and the technical and organizational measures to implement the data protection principles The data protection certification criteria are determined by the certification bodies or certification scheme owners and then approved by the competent supervisory authority or by the EDPB. For further information about certification mechanisms, we refer the reader to the EDPB Guideline on Certification42 and other relevant guidance, as published on the EDPB website. 41 See Recital 74, where controllers are required to demonstrate the effectiveness of their measures. 42 EDPB. “Guidelines 1/2018 on certification and identifying certification criteria in accordance with Articles 42 and 43 of the Regulation”. Version 3.0, 4 June 2019. edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines_201801_v3.0_certificationcriteria_annex2_en.pdf --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted 91. Even where a processing operation is awarded a certification in accordance with Article 42, the controller still has the responsibility to continuously monitor and improve compliance with the DPbDD- criteria of Article