or wrongful treatment of a health protocol, or an incorrect image of a person can lead to decisions being made on the wrong basis either manually, using automated decision-making, or through artificial intelligence. 79. Key design and default accuracy elements may include:  Data source – Sources of personal data should be reliable in terms of data accuracy.  Degree of accuracy – Each personal data element should be as accurate as necessary for the specified purposes.  Measurably accurate - Reduce the number of false positives/negatives, for example biases in automated decisions and artificial intelligence.  Verification – Depending on the nature of the data, in relation to how often it may change, the controller should verify the correctness of personal data with the data subject before and at different stages of the processing (e.g. to age requirements).  Erasure/rectification – The controller shall erase or rectify inaccurate data without delay. The controller shall in particular facilitate this where the data subjects are or were children and later want to remove such personal data.39  Error propagation avoidance – Controllers should mitigate the effect of an accumulated error in the processing chain. 38 Art. 5(1)(d) GDPR. 39 Cf. Recital 65. --- PAGE 24 --- Adopted  Access – Data subjects should be given information about and effective access to personal data in accordance with the GDPR articles 12 to 15 in order to control accuracy and rectify as needed.  Continued accuracy – Personal data should be accurate at all stages of the processing, tests of accuracy should be carried out at critical steps.  Up to date – Personal data shall be updated if necessary for the purpose.  Data design - Use of technological and organisational design features to decrease inaccuracy, for example present concise predetermined choices instead of free text fields. Example 1 An insurance company wishes to use artificial intelligence (AI) to profile customers buying insurance as a basis for their decision making when calculating the insurance risk. When determining how their AI solutions should be developed, they are determining the means of processing and shall consider data protection by design when choosing an AI application from a vendor and when deciding on how to train the AI. When determining how to train the AI, the controller should have accurate data to achieve precise results. Therefore, the controller should ensure that the data used to train the AI is accurate. Granted that they have a valid legal basis to train the AI using personal data from a large subset of their existing customers, the controller chooses a pool of customers that is representative of the population to also avoid bias. The customer data is then collected from the respective data handling system, including data on the type of insurance, for example health insurance, home insurance, travel insurance, etc. as well as data from public registries they have lawful access to. All data are pseudonymized prior to transfer to the system dedicated to the training of the AI model. To ensure that the data used for AI training is as accurate as possible, the controller only collects data from data sources with correct and up-to date information. The insurance company tests whether the AI is reliable and provides non-discriminatory results both during its development and finally before the product is released. When the AI is fully trained and operative, the insurance company uses the results to support the insurance risk assessments, yet without solely relying on the AI to decide whether to grant insurance, unless the decision is made in accordance with the exceptions in Article 22 (2) GDPR. The insurance company will also regularly review the results from the AI, to maintain the reliability and when necessary adjust the algorithm. Example 2 The controller is a health institution looking to find methods to ensure the integrity and accuracy of personal data in their client registers. In situations where two persons arrive at the institution at the same time and receive the same treatment, there is a risk of mistaking them if the only parameter to distinguish them is by name. To ensure accuracy, the controller needs a unique identifier for each person, and therefore more information than just the name of the client. --- PAGE 25 --- Adopted The institution uses several systems containing personal information of clients, and needs to ensure that the information related to the client is correct, accurate and consistent in all the systems at any point in time. The institution has identified several risks that may arise if information is changed in one system but not in the others. The controller decides to mitigate the risk by using a hashing technique that can be used to ensure integrity of data in the treatment journal. Immutable cryptographic time stamps are created for treatment journal records and the client associated with them so that any changes can be recognized, correlated and traced if required. 3.7 Storage limitation 80. The controller must ensure that personal data is kept in a form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes for which the personal data is processed.40 It is vital that the controller knows exactly what personal data the company processes and why. The purpose of the processing shall be the main criterion to decide in how long personal data shall be stored. 81. Measures and safeguards that implement the principle of storage limitation shall complement the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, specifically, the right to erasure and the right to object. 82. Key design and default storage limitation elements may include:  Deletion and anonymization – The controller should have clear internal procedures and functionalities for deletion and/or anonymization.  Effectiveness of anonymization/deletion – The controller shall make sure that it is not possible to re-identify anonymized data or recover deleted data, and should test whether this is possible.  Automation – Deletion of certain personal data should be automated  Storage criteria – The controller shall determine what data and length of storage is necessary for the purpose.  Justification – The controller shall be able to justify why the period of storage is necessary for the purpose and the personal data in question, and be able to disclose the rationale behind, and legal grounds for the retention period.  Enforcement of retention policies – The controller should enforce internal retention policies and conduct tests of whether the organization practices its policies.  Backups/logs – Controllers shall determine what personal data and length of storage is necessary for back-ups and logs.  Data flow – Controllers should beware of the flow of personal data, and the storage of any copies thereof, and seek to limit their “temporary” storage. Example The controller collects personal data where the purpose of the processing is to administer a membership of the data subject. The personal data shall be deleted when the membership is terminated and there is no legal basis for further storage of the data. 40 Art. 5(1)(c) GDPR. --- PAGE 26 --- Adopted The controller first draws up an internal procedure for data retention and deletion. According to this, employees shall manually delete personal data after the retention period ends. The employee follows the procedure to regularly delete and correct data from any devices, from backups, logs, e-mails and other relevant storage media. To make deletion more effective, and less error-prone, the controller then implements an automatic system instead, in order to delete data automatically, reliably and more regularly. The system is configured to follow the given procedure for data deletion which then occurs at a predefined regular interval to remove personal data from all of the company’s storage media. The controller reviews and tests the retention procedure regularly and ensures that it concurs with the up-to-date retention policy. 3.8 Integrity and confidentiality 83. The principle of integrity and confidentiality includes protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures. The security of personal data requires appropriate measures designed to prevent and manage data breach incidents; to guarantee the proper execution of data processing tasks, and compliance with the other principles; and to facilitate the effective exercise of individuals’ rights. 84. Recital 78 states that one of the DPbDD measures could consist of enabling the controller to “create and improve security features”. Along with other DPbDD measures, Recital 78 suggests a responsibility on the controllers to continually assess whether it is using the appropriate means of processing at all times and to assess whether the chosen measures actually counter the existing vulnerabilities. Furthermore, controllers should conduct regular reviews of the information security measures that surround and protect personal data, and the procedure for handling data breaches. 85. Key design and default integrity and confidentiality elements may include:  Information security management system (ISMS) – Have an operative means of managing policies and procedures for information security.  Risk analysis – Assess the risks against the