website alone is not sufficient for the controller to meet the requirements of transparency. The controller therefore designs an information flow, presenting the data subject with relevant information within the appropriate contexts using e.g. informational snippets or pop-ups. For example, when asking the data subject to enter personal data, the controller informs the data subject of how the personal data will be processed and why that personal data is necessary for the processing. 3.2 Lawfulness 67. The controller must identify a valid legal basis for the processing of personal data. Measures and safeguards should support the requirement to make sure that the whole processing lifecycle is in line with the relevant legal grounds of processing. 68. Key design and default elements for lawfulness may include:  Relevance – The correct legal basis shall be applied to the processing.  Differentiation26 – The legal basis used for each processing activity shall be differentiated.  Specified purpose – The appropriate legal basis must be clearly connected to the specific purpose of processing.27  Necessity– Processing must be necessary and unconditional for the purpose to be lawful.  Autonomy – The data subject should be granted the highest degree of autonomy as possible with respect to control over personal data within the frames of the legal basis.  Gaining consent – consent must be freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous.28 Particular consideration should be given to the capacity of children and young people to provide informed consent.  Consent withdrawal – Where consent is the legal basis, the processing should facilitate withdrawal of consent. Withdrawal shall be as easy as giving consent. If not, then the consent mechanism of the controller does not comply with the GDPR.29  Balancing of interests – Where legitimate interests is the legal basis, the controller must carry out a weighted balancing of interest, giving particular consideration to the power imbalance, specifically children under the age of 18 and other vulnerable groups. There shall be measures and safeguards to mitigate the negative impact on the data subjects.  Predetermination – The legal basis shall be established before the processing takes place.  Cessation – If the legal basis ceases to apply, the processing shall cease accordingly.  Adjust – If there is a valid change of legal basis for the processing, the actual processing must be adjusted in accordance with the new legal basis.30 26 EDPB. “Guidelines 2/2019 on the processing of personal data under Article 6(1)(b) GDPR in the context of the provision of online services to data subjects”. Version 2.0, 8 October 2019. edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines-art_6-1-b- adopted_after_public_consultation_en.pdf 27 See section on purpose limitation below. 28 See Guidelines 05/2020 on consent under Regulation 2016/679. https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work- tools/our-documents/guidelines/guidelines-052020-consent-under-regulation-2016679_en 29 See Guidelines 05/2020 on consent under Regulation 2016/679, p. 24. https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work- tools/our-documents/guidelines/guidelines-052020-consent-under-regulation-2016679_en 30 If the original legal basis is consent, see Guidelines 05/2020 on consent under Regulation 2016/679. https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/guidelines/guidelines-052020-consent-under- regulation-2016679_en --- PAGE 17 --- Adopted  Allocation of responsibility – Whenever joint controllership is envisaged, the parties must apportion in a clear and transparent way their respective responsibilities vis-à-vis the data subject, and design the measures of the processing in accordance with this allocation. Example A bank plans to offer a service to improve efficiency in the management of loan applications. The idea behind the service is that the bank, by requesting permission from the customer, is able to retrieve data about the customer directly from the public tax authorities. This example does not consider processing of personal data from other sources. Obtaining personal data about the data subject’s financial situation is necessary in order to take steps at the request of the data subject prior to entering into a loan contract.31 However, gathering personal data directly from the tax administration is not considered necessary, because the customer is able to enter into a contract by providing the information from the tax administration him or herself. Although the bank may have a legitimate interest in acquiring the documentation from the tax authorities directly, for example to ensure efficiency in the loan processing, giving banks such direct access to the personal data of applicants presents a risks related to the use or potential misuse of access rights When implementing the principle of lawfulness, the controller realizes that in this context, they cannot use the “necessary for contract” basis for the part of the processing that involves gathering personal data directly from the tax authorities. The fact that this specific processing presents a risk of the data subject becoming less involved in the processing of their data is also a relevant factor in assessing the lawfulness of the processing itself. The bank concludes that this part of the processing has to rely on another legal basis of processing. In the particular Member State where the controller is located, there are national laws that permits the bank to gather information from the public tax authorities directly, where the data subject consents to this beforehand. The bank therefore presents information about the processing on the online application platform in such a manner that makes it easy for data subjects to understand what processing is mandatory and what is optional. The processing options, by default, do not allow retrieval of data directly from other sources than the data subject herself, and the option for direct information retrieval is presented in a manner that does not deter the data subject from abstaining. Any consent given to collect data directly from other controllers is a temporary right of access to a specific set of information. Any given consent is processed electronically in a documentable manner, and data subjects are presented with an easy way of controlling what they have consented to and to withdraw their consent. The controller has assessed these DPbDD requirements beforehand and includes all of these criteria in their requirements specification for the tender to procure the platform. The controller is aware that if they do not include the DPbDD requirements in the tender, it may either be too late or a very costly process to implement data protection afterwards. 3.3 Fairness 69. Fairness is an overarching principle which requires that personal data should not be processed in a way that is unjustifiably detrimental, unlawfully discriminatory, unexpected or misleading to the data 31 See Article 6(1)(b) GDPR. --- PAGE 18 --- Adopted subject. Measures and safeguards implementing the principle of fairness also support the rights and freedoms of data subjects, specifically the right to information (transparency), the right to intervene (access, erasure, data portability, rectify) and the right to limit the processing (right not to be subject to automated individual decision-making and non-discrimination of data subjects in such processes). 70. Key design and default fairness elements may include:  Autonomy – Data subjects should be granted the highest degree of autonomy possible to determine the use made of their personal data, as well as over the scope and conditions of that use or processing.  Interaction – Data subjects must be able to communicate and exercise their rights in respect of the personal data processed by the controller.  Expectation – Processing should correspond with data subjects’ reasonable expectations.  Non-discrimination – The controller shall not unfairly discriminate against data subjects.  Non-exploitation – The controller should not exploit the needs or vulnerabilities of data subjects.  Consumer choice – The controller should not “lock in” their users in an unfair manner. Whenever a service processing personal data is proprietary, it may create a lock-in to the service, which may not be fair, if it impairs the data subjects’ possibility to exercise their right of data portability in accordance with Article 20.  Power balance – Power balance should be a key objective of the controller-data subject relationship. Power imbalances should be avoided. When this is not possible, they should be recognised and accounted for with suitable countermeasures.  No risk transfer – Controllers should not transfer the risks of the enterprise to the data subjects.  No deception – Data processing information and options should be provided in an objective and neutral way, avoiding any deceptive or manipulative language or design.  Respect rights – The controller must respect the fundamental rights of data subjects and implement appropriate measures and safeguards and not impinge on those rights unless expressly justified by law.  Ethical – The controller should see the processing’s wider impact on individuals’ rights and dignity.  Truthful – The controller must make available information about how they process personal data, they should act as they declare they will and not mislead the data subjects.  Human intervention – The controller must incorporate qualified human intervention that is capable of uncovering biases that machines may create in accordance with the right to not be subject to automated individual decision making in Article 22.32  Fair algorithms – Regularly assess whether algorithms are functioning in line with the purposes and adjust the algorithms to mitigate uncovered biases and ensure fairness in the processing. Data subjects should be informed about the functioning of the processing