longer does. Neglecting to keep up to date with technological changes could therefore result in a lack of compliance with Article 25. 21. The “state of the art” criterion does not only apply to technological measures, but also to organisational ones. Lack of appropriate organisational measures can lower or even completely undermine the effectiveness of a chosen technology. Examples of organisational measures can be adoption of internal policies; up-to date training on technology, security and data protection; and IT security governance and management policies. 22. Existing and recognized frameworks, standards, certifications, codes of conduct, etc. in different fields may play a role in indicating the current “state of the art” within the given field of use. Where such standards exist and provide a high level of protection for the data subject in compliance with – or go beyond – legal requirements, controllers should take them into account in the design and implementation of data protection measures. 2.1.3.2 “cost of implementation” 23. The controller may take the cost of implementation into account when choosing and applying appropriate technical and organisational measures and necessary safeguards that effectively 8 See German Federal Constitutional Court’s “Kalkar” decision in 1978: https://germanlawarchive.iuscomp.org/?p=67 may provide the foundation for a methodology for an objective definition of the concept. On that basis, the “state of the art” technology level would be identified between the “existing scientific knowledge and research” technology level and the more established “generally accepted rules of technology”. The “state of the art” can hence be identified as the technology level of a service or technology or product that exists in the market and is most effective in achieving the objectives identified. 9 https://www.enisa.europa.eu/news/enisa-news/what-is-state-of-the-art-in-it-security 10 www.teletrust.de/en/publikationen/broschueren/state-of-the-art-in-it-security/ --- PAGE 9 --- Adopted implement the principles in order to protect the rights of data subjects. The cost refers to resources in general, including time and human resources. 24. The cost element does not require the controller to spend a disproportionate amount of resources when alternative, less resource demanding, yet effective measures exist. However, the cost of implementation is a factor to be considered to implement data protection by design rather than a ground to not implement it. 25. Thus, the chosen measures shall ensure that the processing activity foreseen by the controller does not process personal data in violation of the principles, independent of cost. Controllers should be able to manage the overall costs to be able to effectively implement all of the principles and, consequentially, protect the rights. 2.1.3.3 “nature, scope, context and purpose of processing“ 26. Controllers must take into consideration the nature, scope, context and purpose of processing when determining needed measures. 27. These factors should be interpreted consistently with their role in other provisions of the GDPR, such as Articles 24, 32 and 35, with the aim of designing data protection principles into the processing. 28. In short, the concept of nature can be understood as the inherent11 characteristics of the processing. The scope refers to the size and range of the processing. The context relates to the circumstances of the processing, which may influence the expectations of the data subject, while the purpose pertains to the aims of the processing. 2.1.3.4 “risks of varying likelihood and severity for rights and freedoms of natural persons posed by the processing” 29. The GDPR adopts a coherent risk based approach in many of its provisions, in Articles 24, 25, 32 and 35, with a view to identifying appropriate technical and organisational measures to protect individuals, their personal data and complying with the requirements of the GDPR. The assets to protect are always the same (the individuals, via the protection of their personal data), against the same risks (to individuals’ rights), taking into account the same conditions (nature, scope, context and purposes of processing). 30. When performing the risk analysis for compliance with Articles 25, the controller has to identify the risks to the rights of data subjects that a violation of the principles presents, and determine their likelihood and severity in order to implement measures to effectively mitigate the identified risks. A systematic and thorough evaluation of the processing is crucial when doing risk assessments. For example, a controller assesses the particular risks associated with a lack of freely given consent, which constitutes a violation of the lawfulness principle, in the course of the processing of personal data of children and young people under 18 as a vulnerable group, in a case where no other legal ground exists, and implements appropriate measures to address and effectively mitigate the identified risks associated with this group of data subjects. 11 Examples are special categories personal data, automatic decision-making, skewed power relations, unpredictable processing, difficulties for the data subject to exercise the rights, etc. --- PAGE 10 --- Adopted 31. The “EDPB Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA)”,12 which focus on determining whether a processing operation is likely to result in a high risk to the data subject or not, also provide guidance on how to assess data protection risks and how to carry out a data protection risk assessment. These Guidelines may also be useful during the risk assessment in all the articles mentioned above, including Article 25. 32. The risk based approach does not exclude the use of baselines, best practices and standards. These might provide a useful toolbox for controllers to tackle similar risks in similar situations (nature, scope, context and purpose of processing). Nevertheless, the obligation in Article 25 (as well as Articles 24, 32 and 35(7)(c)) to take into account “risks of varying likelihood and severity for rights and freedoms of natural persons posed by the processing” remains. Therefore, controllers, although supported by such tools, must always carry out a data protection risk assessment on a case by case basis for the processing activity at hand and verify the effectiveness of the appropriate measures and safeguards proposed. A DPIA, or an update to an existing DPIA, may then additionally be required. 2.1.4 Time aspect 2.1.4.1 At the time of the determination of the means for processing 33. Data protection by design shall be implemented “at the time of determination of the means for processing”. 34. The “means for processing” range from the general to the detailed design elements of the processing, including the architecture, procedures, protocols, layout and appearance. 35. The “time of determination of the means for processing” refers to the period of time when the controller is deciding how the processing will be conducted and the manner in which the processing will occur and the mechanisms which will be used to conduct such processing. It’s in the process of making such decisions that the controller must assess the appropriate measures and safeguards to effectively implement the principles and rights of data subjects into the processing, and take into account elements such as the state of the art, cost of implementation, nature, scope, context and purpose, and risks. This includes the time of procuring and implementing data processing software, hardware, and services. 36. Early consideration of DPbDD is crucial for a successful implementation of the principles and protection of the rights of the data subjects. Moreover, from a cost-benefit perspective, it is also in controllers’ interest to take DPbDD into account sooner rather than later, as it could be challenging and costly to make later changes to plans that have already been made and processing operations that have already been designed. 2.1.4.2 At the time of the processing itself (maintenance and review of data protection requirements) 37. Once the processing has started the controller has a continued obligation to maintain DPbDD, i.e. the continued effective implementation of the principles in order to protect the rights, staying up to date on the state of the art, reassessing the level of risk, etc. The nature, scope and context of processing operations, as well as the risk may change over the course of processing, which means that the 12 Article 29 Working Party “Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether processing is “likely to result in a high risk” for the purposes of Regulation 2016/679”. WP 248 rev.01, 4 October 2017. ec.europa.eu/newsroom/document.cfm?doc_id=47711 - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 11 --- Adopted controller must re-evaluate their processing operations through regular reviews and assessments of the effectiveness of their chosen measures and safeguards. 38. The obligation to maintain, review and update, as necessary, the processing operation also applies to pre-existing systems. This means that legacy systems designed before the GDPR entered into force are required to undergo reviews and maintenance to ensure the implementation of measures and safeguards that implement the principles and rights of data subjects in an effective manner, as outlined in these Guidelines. 39. This obligation also extends to any processing carried out by means of data processors. Processors’ operations should be regularly reviewed and assessed by the controllers to ensure that they enable continuous compliance with the principles and allow the data controller to fulfil its obligations in this respect. 2.2 Article 25(2): Data protection by default 2.2.1 By default,