accessible to those who need it when necessary, for example in critical situations. Access controls should be observed for the whole data flow during the processing. 56. Article 25(2) further states that personal data shall not be made accessible, without the individual’s intervention, to an indefinite number of natural persons. The controller shall by default limit accessibility and give the data subject the possibility to intervene before publishing or otherwise making available personal data about the data subject to an indefinite number of natural persons. 57. Making personal data available to an indefinite number of persons may result in even further dissemination of the data than initially intended. This is particularly relevant in the context of the Internet and search engines. This means that controllers should by default give data subjects an 17 According to Art. 4(2) GDPR, this includes collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or destruction. 18 Article 29 Working Party. “Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques”. WP 216, 10 April 2014. ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2014/wp216_en.pdf 19 Please see Art. 4(1) GDPR, Recital 26 GDPR, Article 29 Working Party “Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques”. Please also see the subsection on "storage limitation" in section 3 of this document, referring to the need for the controller to ensure the effectiveness of the implemented anonymisation technique(s). --- PAGE 14 --- Adopted opportunity to intervene before personal data is made available on the open Internet. This is particularly important when it comes to children and vulnerable groups. 58. Depending on the legal grounds for processing, the opportunity to intervene could vary based on the context of the processing. For example, to ask for consent to make the personal data publicly accessible, or to have privacy settings so that data subjects themselves can control public access. 59. Even in the event that personal data is made available publicly with the permission and understanding of a data subject, it does not mean that any other controller with access to the personal data may freely process it themselves for their own purposes – they must have their own legal basis.20 IMPLEMENTING DATA PROTECTION PRINCIPLES IN THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA USING DATA PROTECTION BY DESIGN AND BY DEFAULT 60. In all stages of design of the processing activities, including procurement, tenders, outsourcing, development, support, maintenance, testing, storage, deletion, etc., the controller should take into account and consider the various elements of DPbDD which will be illustrated by examples in this chapter in the context of implementation of the principles.21 22 23 61. Controllers need to implement the principles to achieve DPbDD. These principles include: transparency, lawfulness, fairness, purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation, integrity and confidentiality, and accountability. These principles are outlined in Article 5 and Recital 39 of the GDPR. To have a complete understanding of how to implement DPbDD, the importance of understanding the meaning of each of the principles is emphasised. 62. When presenting examples of how to operationalize DPbDD we have made lists of key DPbDD elements for each of the principles. The examples, while highlighting the specific data protection principle in question, may overlap with other closely related principles as well. The EDPB underlines that the key elements and the examples presented hereunder are neither exhaustive nor binding, but are meant as guiding elements for each of the principles. Controllers need to assess how to guarantee compliance with the principles in the context of the concrete processing operation in question. 63. While this section focuses on the implementation of the principles, the controller should also implement appropriate and effective ways to protect data subjects’ rights, also according to Chapter III in the GDPR where this is not already mandated by the principles themselves. 64. The accountability principle is overarching: it requires the controller to be responsible choosing the necessary technical and organisational measures. 20 See Case of Satakunnan Markkinapörssi Oy and Satamedia Oy v. Finland no. 931/13. 21 More examples can be found in Norwegian Data Protection Authority. “Software Development with Data Protection by Design and by Default”. 28 November 2017. www.datatilsynet.no/en/about- privacy/virksomhetenes-plikter/innebygd-personvern/data-protection-by-design-and-by-default/?id=7729 22 https://www.cnil.fr/en/cnil-publishes-gdpr-guide-developers 23 https://www.aepd.es/sites/default/files/2019-12/guia-privacidad-desde-diseno_en.pdf --- PAGE 15 --- Adopted 3.1 Transparency24 65. The controller must be clear and open with the data subject about how they will collect, use and share personal data. Transparency is about enabling data subjects to understand, and if necessary, make use of their rights in Articles 15 to 22. The principle is embedded in Articles 12, 13, 14 and 34. Measures and safeguards put in place to support the principle of transparency should also support the implementation of these Articles. 66. Key design and default elements for the principle of transparency may include:  Clarity – Information shall be in clear and plain language, concise and intelligible.  Semantics – Communication should have a clear meaning to the audience in question.  Accessibility - Information shall be easily accessible for the data subject.  Contextual – Information should be provided at the relevant time and in the appropriate form.  Relevance – Information should be relevant and applicable to the specific data subject.  Universal design – Information shall be accessible to all data subjects, include use of machine readable languages to facilitate and automate readability and clarity.  Comprehensible – Data subjects should have a fair understanding of what they can expect with regards to the processing of their personal data, particularly when the data subjects are children or other vulnerable groups.  Multi-channel – Information should be provided in different channels and media, not only the textual, to increase the probability for the information to effectively reach the data subject.  Layered – The information should be layered in a manner that resolves the tension between completeness and understanding, while accounting for data subjects’ reasonable expectations. Example25 A controller is designing a privacy policy on their website in order to comply with the requirements of transparency. The privacy policy should not contain a lengthy bulk of information that is difficult for the average data subject to penetrate and understand. It shall be written in clear and concise language and make it easy for the user of the website to understand how their personal data is processed. The controller therefore provides information in a layered manner, where the most important points are highlighted. More detailed information is made easily available. Drop-down menus and links to other pages are provided to further explain the various items, and concepts used in the policy. The controller also makes sure that the information is provided in a multi-channel manner, providing video clips to explain the most important points of the written information. Synergy between the various pages is vital to ensure that the layered approach does not heighten confusion, rather reduce it. The privacy policy should not be difficult for data subjects to access. The privacy policy is thus made available and visible on all web-pages of the site in question, so that the data subject is always only one click away from accessing the information. The information provided is also designed in accordance with the best practices and standards of universal design to make it accessible to all. 24 Elaboration on how to understand the concept of transparency can be found in Article 29 Working Party. “Guidelines on transparency under Regulation 2016/679”. WP 260 rev.01, 11 April 2018. ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=51025 - endorsed by the EDPB 25 The French Data Protection Authority has published several examples illustrating best practices in informing users as well as other transparency principles: https://design.cnil.fr/en/. --- PAGE 16 --- Adopted Moreover, necessary information should also be provided in the right context, at the appropriate time. Since the controller carries out many processing operations using the data collected on the website, a general privacy policy on the website alone is not sufficient for the controller to meet the requirements of transparency. The controller therefore designs an information flow, presenting the data subject with relevant information within the appropriate contexts using e.g. informational snippets or pop-ups. For example, when asking the data subject to enter personal data, the controller informs the data subject of how the personal data will be processed and why that personal data is necessary for the processing. 3.2 Lawfulness 67. The controller must identify a valid legal basis for the processing of personal data. Measures and safeguards should support the requirement to make sure that the whole processing lifecycle is in line with the relevant legal grounds of processing. 68. Key design and default elements for lawfulness may include:  Relevance – The correct legal basis shall be applied to the processing.  Differentiation26 – The legal basis used for each processing activity shall be differentiated.  Specified purpose – The appropriate legal basis must be clearly connected to the specific purpose of processing.27  Necessity– Processing must be necessary and unconditional for the purpose to be lawful.  Autonomy – The data subject should be granted the highest degree of autonomy as possible