in their assessment of compliance with the GDPR, specifically with regards to DPbDD. 90. When a processing operation by a controller or processor is certified according to Article 42, the elements that contribute to demonstrating compliance with Article 25(1) and (2) are the design processes, i.e. the process of determining the means of processing, the governance and the technical and organizational measures to implement the data protection principles The data protection certification criteria are determined by the certification bodies or certification scheme owners and then approved by the competent supervisory authority or by the EDPB. For further information about certification mechanisms, we refer the reader to the EDPB Guideline on Certification42 and other relevant guidance, as published on the EDPB website. 41 See Recital 74, where controllers are required to demonstrate the effectiveness of their measures. 42 EDPB. ŌĆ£Guidelines 1/2018 on certification and identifying certification criteria in accordance with Articles 42 and 43 of the RegulationŌĆØ. Version 3.0, 4 June 2019. edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines_201801_v3.0_certificationcriteria_annex2_en.pdf --- PAGE 29 --- Adopted 91. Even where a processing operation is awarded a certification in accordance with Article 42, the controller still has the responsibility to continuously monitor and improve compliance with the DPbDD- criteria of Article 25. ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE 25 AND CONSEQUENCES 92. Supervisory authorities may assess compliance with Article 25 according to the procedures listed in Article 58. The corrective powers are specified in Article 58(2) and include the issuance of warnings, reprimands, orders to comply with data subjectsŌĆÖ rights, limitations on or ban of processing, administrative fines, etc. 93. DPbDD is further a factor in determining the level of monetary sanctions for breaches of the GDPR, see Article 83(4).43 44 RECOMMENDATIONS 94. Although not directly addressed in Article 25, processors and producers are also recognized as key enablers for DPbDD, they should be aware that controllers are required to only process personal data with systems and technologies that have built-in data protection. 95. When processing on behalf of controllers, or providing solutions to controllers, processors and producers should use their expertise to build trust and guide their customers, including SMEs, in designing /procuring solutions that embed data protection into the processing. This means in turn that the design of products and services should facilitate controllersŌĆÖ needs. 96. It should be kept in mind when implementing Article 25 that the main design objective is the effective implementation of the principles and protection of the rights of data subjects into the appropriate measures of the processing. In order to facilitate and enhance the adoption of DPbDD, we make the following recommendations to controllers as well as producers and processors: ’éĘ Controllers should think of data protection from the initial stages of planning a processing operation, even before the time of determination of the means of processing. ’éĘ Where the controller has a Data Protection Officer (DPO), the EDPB encourages the active involvement of the DPO to integrate DPbDD in the procurement and development procedures, as well as in the whole processing life-cycle. ’éĘ A processing operation may be certified. The ability to get a processing operation certified provides an added value to a controller when choosing between different processing software, hardware, services and/or systems from producers or processors. Therefore, producers should strive to demonstrate DPbDD in the life-cycle of their development of a processing solution. A certification seal may also guide data subjects in their choice between different goods and services. Having the ability to get a processing certified can serve as a competitive advantage for producers, processors and controllers, and even enhances data subjectsŌĆÖ trust in the 43 Article 83(2)(d) GDPR stipulates that in determining the imposition of fines for breach of the GDPR ŌĆ£due regardŌĆØ shall be taken of ŌĆ£the degree of responsibility of the controller or processor taking into account technical and organisational measures implemented by them pursuant to Articles 25 and 32ŌĆ£. 44 More information on fines can be found in Article 29 Working Party. ŌĆ£Guidelines on application and setting of administrative fines for the purposes of the Regulation 2016/679ŌĆØ. WP 253, 3 October 2017. ec.europa.eu/newsroom/just/document.cfm?doc_id=47889 - endorsed by the EDPB. --- PAGE 30 --- Adopted processing of their personal data. If no certification is offered, controllers should seek to have other guarantees that producers or processors comply with the requirements of DPbDD. ’éĘ Controllers, processors and producers, should consider their obligations to provide children under 18 and other vulnerable groups with specific protection in complying with DPbDD. ’éĘ Producers and processors should seek to facilitate DPbDD implementation in order to support the controllerŌĆÖs ability to comply with Article 25 obligations. Controllers, on the other hand, should not choose producers or processors who do not offer systems enabling or supporting the controller to comply with Article 25, because controllers will be held accountable for the lack of implementation thereof. ’éĘ Producers and processors should play an active role in ensuring that the criteria for the ŌĆ£state of the artŌĆØ are met, and notify controllers of any changes to the ŌĆ£state of the artŌĆØ that may affect the effectiveness of the measures they have in place. Controllers should include this requirement as a contractual clause to make sure they are kept up to date. ’éĘ The EDPB recommends controllers to require that producers and processors demonstrate how their hardware, software, services or systems enable the controller to comply with the requirements to accountability in accordance with DPbDD, for example by using key performance indicators to demonstrate the effectiveness of the measures and safeguards at implementing the principles and rights. ’éĘ The EDPB emphasizes the need for a harmonized approach to implement principles and rights in an effective manner and encourages associations or bodies preparing codes of conduct in accordance with Article 40 to also incorporate sector-specific guidance on DPbDD. ’éĘ Controllers should be fair to data subjects and transparent on how they assess and demonstrate effective DPbDD implementation, in the same manner as controllers demonstrate compliance with the GDPR under the principle of accountability. ’éĘ Privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs) that have reached the state-of-the-art maturity can be employed as a measure in accordance with the DPbDD requirements if appropriate in a risk based approach. PETs in themselves do not necessarily cover the obligations of Article 25. Controllers shall assess whether the measure is appropriate and effective in implementing the data protection principles and the rights of data subjects. ’éĘ Existing legacy systems are under the same DPbDD-obligations as new systems. If legacy systems do not already comply with DPbDD, and changes cannot be made to comply with the obligations, then the legacy system simply does not meet GDPR-obligations and cannot be used to process personal data. ’éĘ Article 25 does not lower the threshold of requirements for SMEs. The following points may facilitate SMEsŌĆÖ compliance with Article 25: o Do early risk assessments o Start with small processing ŌĆō then scale its scope and sophistication later o Look for producer and processor guarantees of DPbDD, such as certification and adherence to code of conducts o Use partners with a good track record o Talk with DPAs o Read guidance from DPAs and the EDPB o Adhere to codes of conduct where available o Get professional help and advice --- PAGE 31 --- Adopted For the European Data Protection Board The Chair (Andrea Jelinek)